Title: LeafInst - Unified Instance Segmentation Network for Fine-Grained Forestry Leaf Phenotype Analysis: A New UAV based Benchmark

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.03616v1

Published Time: Thu, 05 Mar 2026 01:27:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# LeafInst - Unified Instance Segmentation Network for Fine-Grained Forestry Leaf Phenotype Analysis: A New UAV based Benchmark 

Taige Luo a,b,1 , Junru Xie a,b,1 , Chenyang Fan a, Bingrong Liu e, Ruisheng Wang d, Yang Shao b, Sheng Xu a, ∗, Lin Cao c    

> aCollege of Information Science and Technology &Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing, 210037, Jiangsu, China
> bDepartment of Geography, College of Natural Resources and Environment, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA
> cCo-Innovation Center for Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing, 210037, Jiangsu, China
> dSchool of Architecture &Urban Planning, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, Guangdong, China
> eSchool of Software, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, 230601, Anhui, China

Abstract 

Intelligent forest tree breeding has spurred significant advancements in plant phenotyping research. However, the existing studies predominantly concentrate on agricultural scenarios involving large-leaf crops, leaving a notable gap in the fine-grained research on the leaves of sapling trees in open-field environments. Moreover, leaves in natural settings present potential challenges due to variations in scale, brightness, and shape. To tackle these critical issues, this study employed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to survey field-grown saplings and collect 1,202 branches, encompassing a total of 19,876 leaf instances. Leveraging this data, we introduce and publicly release an open-source UAV RGB remote sensing dataset, named Poplar-leaf. Significantly, this dataset represents the first pixel-level annotated instance segmentation dataset specifically tailored for forestry leaves in open-field scenes. Regarding accurate segmentation, a novel network architecture, LeafInst, is proposed. For scale changes, the Asymptotic Fea-ture Pyramid Network (AFPN) is integrated into the Neck component, which e ff ectively enhances progressive multi-scale visual perception. Additionally, a novel Dynamic Asymmetric Spatial Perception (DASP) module is designed to optimize feature ex-traction for irregularly shaped leaves. Based on it, we propose a dual-residual Dynamic Anomalous Regression Head (DARH) block to enhance the detection feature fusion. The proposed Top-down Concatenation–decoder Feature Fusion (TCFU) fuses the output with the bounding box regression branch, e ff ectively mitigating redundant feature representations. Quantitative experiments demonstrate that, on the Poplar-leaf dataset, LeafInst achieves a 7.1% improvement in segmentation mAP (68.4) compared with YOLOv11, and a 6.5% gain over the transformer-decoder-based MaskDINO. Furthermore, on the public large-scale agricultural benchmark dataset PhenoBench, LeafInst outperforms MaskDINO by 3.4% in box mAP, reaching 52.7 mAP. Qualitative experi-ments show that LeafInst outperforms the large visual models in zero-shot scenes. Finally, we present two downstream applications to highlight the real-world utility of the proposed model, while also supporting its robustness across diverse scenarios: robust leaf segmentation in complex scenes, and a novel high-throughput Leaf Growth Condition Indicator (LGCI) for quantitative assessment of leaf phenotypic development (from 1850 leaf instances). 

Keywords: Deep Learning, Computer Vision, UAV remote sensing, Instance segmentation, Leaf phenotype analysis, Intelligent forestry 

1. Introduction 

With the advancement of smart forestry, research combining "intelligent" models with practical applications has been grow-ing rapidly. Current deep learning-based studies have covered numerous domains, including wheat ear phenotyping identifi-cation [1, 2], forest tree species recognition [3, 4], fine-grained classification of forest land use [5, 6, 7], and crop disease /pest detection [8, 9, 10]. These studies have demonstrated sig-nificant practical value. As the most critical component of forests, trees play a vital role in understanding forest dynam-ics. Forestry breeding represents a significant silvicultural chal-lenge that relies on precise plant phenotyping analysis to select superior varieties with optimal growth characteristics, luxuri-

> ∗Corresponding author: Sheng Xu (xusheng@njfu.edu.cn)
> 1These authors contributed equally to this work.

ant foliage, and adequate water content [11, 12, 13]. Conven-tional breeding remains an e ff ective approach for forest tree improvement internationally. Leading forestry nations should place greater emphasis on phenotypic and genetic evaluation of germplasm resources, along with the exploration and utilization of unique genetic materials, to establish comprehensive core collections. Long-term breeding programs have entered a phase of accelerated development, where continuous genetic gains in improved varieties are being achieved through techniques such as hybrid breeding and multiple-trait integration breed-ing. However, systematic genetic evaluation of germplasm re-sources and core collection establishment have not been con-ducted for most tree species. Key technologies such as parental selection, early-stage selection, and stable high-yield seed or-chards remain unbroken. The traditional manual evaluation system relies on field inspections, which are time-consuming, labor-intensive, subjective, and potentially damaging to parent 

> arXiv:2603.03616v1 [cs.CV] 4 Mar 2026 Figure 1: Challenges in forestry leaf phenotyping. (a) Scale changes, (b) Brightness changes, (c) Shape changes.

trees. This system fails to establish intelligent standardized evaluation criteria and frameworks, resulting in current breed-ing practices that cannot meet growing consumer demands. In terms of production capacity, taking China as an example, of-ficial statistics from 2016 indicate that while the country pos-sesses 4.68 billion mu (approximately 312 million hectares) of forest land, it faces severe timber shortages. The total timber consumption reached 522 million cubic meters, with projec-tions suggesting an annual supply-demand gap exceeding 450 million cubic meters post-2025. This implies an annual tran-sition of 50 million cubic meters of timber production from natural forests to plantations. Currently, most seedlings trans-planted to plantation areas are immature, and traditional manual analysis methods demonstrate poor adaptability. Conventional breeding programs primarily emphasize "fast growth, stress re-sistance, and wood quality" while neglecting the carbon se-questration capacity of individual tree leaves. A tree’s carbon sequestration potential is directly determined by its biomass accumulation rate, which correlates closely with leaf pheno-typic traits (e.g., Leaf Area Index (LAI)[14], Specific Leaf Area (SLA) [15], trunk morphology (DBH) [16], height increment [17], and root architecture [18, 19]). "Early-stage selection" has emerged as a core challenge in forest tree improvement. As a fundamental indicator of vegetation growth, leaf-derived parameters can e ff ectively evaluate developmental potential in trees [20]. Individual Tree Segmentation (ITS) has emerged as a re-search focus in recent years. However, forest tree breed-ing requires finer-grained phenotypic parameters, driving the trend toward more "granular" research subjects. To assist agricultural /forestry practitioners and ecologists in extracting fine-grained tree structures, analyzing plant phenotypes, and improving superior variety selection, researchers have con-ducted experiments on tree branches [21, 22, 23], crown width [24, 25, 26], and DBH [27, 28]. These studies significantly contribute to understanding plant health status and predicting growth trends, enabling the selection of elite varieties at early seedling stages for cultivating high-yield specimens. Neverthe-less, few forestry studies address the most critical phenotypic parameter - leaves. Current leaf-level research primarily fo-cuses on visibly diseased /pest-infected leaves [29, 30] and agri-cultural crop leaves [31, 32, 33]. This study represents the first instance-based investigation of forest tree leaves, establishing a fundamental milestone for this field. Building upon agricultural "crop phenomics platform" experiences, this framework can be extended to deploy fixed cameras in plantation test areas to ana-lyze leaf growth rates through video streams, develop dynamic genetic gain evaluation models, and open-source the dataset on global platforms. These e ff orts will provide data support for worldwide forest ecological breeding initiatives. Compared to agricultural crops, tree leaves present distinct challenges: dense distribution, broad leaf morphology, and close-range sampling. In addition, agricultural leaves often present orthorectified images, which reduce the angles transfor-mation. However, the height and density of trees expose them to environmental variables, leading to uneven illumination, high occlusion density, and morphological deformations. Overall, forestry leaf UAV images present three major challenges: 1. Scale changes (as the drone lens expands and contracts). Scale variations arise from changes in camera configurations and task requirements, leading UAV imagery to focus on di ff erent spatial levels, including individual leaves, branches, and entire trees. 2. Brightness Changes (as sampling time changes). Bright-ness variations arise from changes in sampling time: insu ffi -cient illumination at night and varying illumination angles and intensities during daytime introduce diverse shadow patterns, posing significant challenges for accurate instance extraction. 3. Shape changes (varying with the sampling object), due to the species diversity of trees, we divide leaf types into micro-phyllous and macrophyllous . We illustrate these challenges in Figure 1, which significantly increases recognition complexity. To address the scarcity of forestry leaf data, we conducted UAV circumnavigation flights around individual poplars in Dongtai Plantation, capturing multi-angle, variable-lighting leaf samples. Assisted by AI foundation model Segment Any-thing(SAM) [34] with forestry expert annotation, we devel-oped the Poplar-leaf dataset - the first pixel-level annotated, high-quality open-source dataset specifically designed for ju-venile poplar leaves instances segmentation. For this, our re-search team spent nearly two months screening out plants with 2Figure 2: The workflow and downstream applications of the proposed framework LeafInst. 

good traits and growth periods. Our proposed LeafInst model demonstrates exceptional zero-shot transfer capability to other agricultural /forestry leaf analysis tasks by training with Poplar-leaf. The proposed workflow is detailed in Figure 2. Addition-ally, we propose two practically valuable downstream applica-tions. Firstly, we use LeafInst to finish leaf instances segmenta-tion tasks under di ff erent challenge scenarios (Scale Changes, Brightness Changes, Shape Changes). Secondly, we propose a novel high-throughput indicator, LGCI. This indicator is used to quantify the growth and development of leaves, implying leaf shape and band information. It can be used to infer the growth trend of leaves and conduct breeding selection. These applica-tions directly address critical bottlenecks in forest tree breeding. Contributions are as follows: 

• We present an open-source Poplar-leaf dataset. This estab-lishes a much-needed benchmark for forest leaf segmenta-tion, which was previously absent in the remote sensing study, serving as a foundation for future ecological stud-ies. It collected 1,202 young poplar branches via UAV field sampling, comprising 19,876 leaf instances. Addi-tionally, this study provides approximately 40.8 GB of poplar sapling instances covering 20,000 square meters for the extended research. 

• A high-precision segmentation framework, LeafInst, is proposed to deal with leaf instance segmentation at the scale of individual leaves, individual branches, and indi-vidual trees from di ff erent forestry scenarios. We propose a novel unified DARH head built in DASP to enhance the detection accuracy for three challenges. Additionally, we re-explore existing feature fusion strategy and propose a simple but useful TCFU strategy to solve the problem of low-level feature redundancy. Compared to existing SOTA algorithms, the proposed network demonstrate its superi-ority by quantitative and qualitative comparison. 3• We proposed a high-throughput leaf growth refinement expression indicator LGCI for quantitative assessment of leaf phenotypic development based on predicted instances (over 1850 instances, with most R2 on average of 0.9 for secondary indicators). Experiments show that the proposed Poplar-leaf dataset bridges the gap between instance segmentation and Leaf phe-notype analysis in the open-field scenes. LeafInst has sur-passed the existing models and demonstrated strong robustness in subsequent application challenges, which is demonstrated by downstream applications for forestry breeding, especially in the growth analysis of leaves with high throughput. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Plant Phenotype Research Based on the Forestry Remote Sensing Technologies 

With the advancement of remote sensing technologies, an increasing number of studies have focused on forestry re-mote sensing. In terms of spatial scale, existing research can be broadly categorized into large-scale vegetation inversion at coarse spatial resolution and fine-scale vegetation inversion at high spatial resolution. Traditional methods employ remote sensing imagery for large-scale vegetation mapping and in-version. For example, Lukas et al.[35] utilized the radiative transfer model (RTM) to simulate the directional reflectance of winter wheat by combining the PROSPECT-D leaf RTM and 4SAIL canopy RTM. The RTM inputs include physical charac-teristics of leaves and canopies, such as chlorophyll content and leaf angle. This research successfully monitored wheat growth and phenological stages at a landscape scale. Ren et al.[36] ex-plored annual wheat growth patterns using time-series MODIS NDVI 8-day composite data, establishing a foundation for un-derstanding the crop’s intensity dynamics from 2001 to 2003. Lukas et al.[35] suggested that future research should focus more on scaling leaf features to canopy levels and investigat-ing finer-grained phenological stages. Currently, fine-grained individual tree modeling methods can be categorized into two types based on data availability: ap-proaches using 2D optical images and those employing 3D Li-DAR point clouds. These two branches have significantly ad-vanced the field of individual tree modeling and contributed substantially to understanding ecological indicators. In the past, due to hardware limitations, high-resolution optical im-ages were di ffi cult to obtain, and LiDAR point cloud-based methods primarily relied on traditional machine learning. In the domain of individual tree segmentation, these methods have made commendable attempts to analyze tree skeleton structures and acquire vegetation phenotypic parameters. For instance, Xu et al.[37] applied an optimized point clustering method and achieved promising results for stem extraction. While Li et al.[38] proposed a novel individual tree detection direction based on multichannel representation. However, traditional ma-chine learning-based approaches require substantial time for data collection and struggle to meet real-time monitoring au-tomatically. With the development of deep learning and GPU hardware, more vision models have emerged. Specifically, deep learning has quickly dominated research due to its superior per-formance and inference speed [39, 40]. These studies typically focus on modeling complete tree structures, while research on more refined local features—such as branches [41], flower buds [42], and fruits remains scarce [43], especially leaves. How-ever, these key components of trees are very important for breeding. Consequently, some researchers have begun using high-resolution and more accessible optical images for vegeta-tion phenotyping, achieving results comparable to point clouds at lower costs and with faster inference speeds. For example, Fan et al.[1] employed a few-shot deep learning approach to complete research on wheat head counting, advancing intelli-gent crop yield estimation. Cao et al.[4] successfully imple-mented cross-scale plantation canopy extraction using an opti-mized YOLO model. Nevertheless, most existing studies focus on agricultural leaves. Some studies, such as that by Barreto et al.[44]., inves-tigated leaf phenotyping through instance segmentation across four sugar beet plots. However, due to limitations in imaging viewpoints, the acquired images are presented as orthorectified remote sensing imagery, which makes it di ffi cult to capture the diverse and deformable postures of forestry leaves. In addition, Weyler et al.[45]. proposed a novel convolution-based neural network that achieved successful leaf segmentation. Neverthe-less, their study was still restricted to sugar beet and weed sce-narios and did not further analyze phenotypic parameters. As a result, these methods are di ffi cult to directly transfer to forestry applications. Compared to agricultural leaf instances, tree leaves are denser, unevenly illuminated, and often exhibit irregular shapes due to greater exposure to wind at higher elevations. More-over, trees have longer growth cycles, making phenotypic data monitoring at each stage important for breeding. The extreme irregularity of leaf morphology increases annotation costs, lead-ing most current studies to rely on mature indoor tree samples [46, 47]. However, these samples fail to adequately reflect en-vironmental challenges in natural settings and are too limited in quantity to support multi-species leaf transfer learning. Given the absence of open-source leaf instance datasets in this field, we address this critical research gap by providing a finely an-notated dataset of young poplar leaves in natural environments. 

2.2. Instances Segmentation Models Based on the Deep Learn-ing 

The development of deep learning has significantly advanced computer vision and enabled a variety of downstream appli-cations. Instance segmentation holds significant application value. It combines the characteristics of object detection and semantic segmentation, requiring not only the classification of each pixels but also the discrimination of di ff erent instances within the same category. It has demonstrated application prospects in fields such as autonomous driving [48, 49], med-ical image analysis [50, 51], face recognition [52], and remote sensing imagery [53, 54]. The development of instance segmentation methods has gone through several important stages: from early traditional im-4Figure 3: Overview of the main structure of the proposed LeafInst. 

> Figure 4: Adaptive spatial fusion operation (ASFF) built in AFPN.

age processing methods to deep learning-based approaches, and then to end-to-end solutions. Current mainstream meth-ods can be divided into the following categories: two-stage pre-detection instances segmentation, single-stage mask-based instances segmentation, and transformer-based methods. The core di ff erence between two-stage and single-stage networks lies in whether explicit object detection is required and whether detection information is utilized in downstream segmentation. Early on, Faster-RCNN proposed by Ren et al.[55] estab-lished a classic paradigm for object detection algorithms, whose core involves matching positive and negative samples through pixels-level anchor boxes and screening potential target boxes via Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS). Subsequently, He et al.[56] extended this framework by introducing a segmenta-tion branch built upon the detected bounding boxes. Using ROIAlign to precisely align Regions of Interest (ROIs) with the backbone feature maps, the network predicts instance-level masks, forming the classic two-stage Mask R-CNN architec-ture. This network is still applied in various baseline tasks and has achieved excellent results. Due to the fixed training thresh-old of this network, Cai et al.[57] proposed an optimized Cas-cade Mask R-CNN algorithm, which trains multiple cascaded detectors through a preset series of increasing IoU thresholds to obtain more accurate detection and segmentation results. Addi-tionally, BoxInst e ff ectively combines the relationship between bounding boxes and instance masks [58]. They present a high-performance method that can achieve mask-level instance seg-mentation with only bounding-box annotations for training. In recent years, due to their complex and interdependent structures, detection-based segmentation algorithms require more time for inference and training, leading to rapid devel-opments in single-stage networks. The YOLACT architecture proposed by Daniel et al.[59] divides detection and segmen-tation into two parallel processes. By generating k prototype masks in the segmentation branch and k mask coe ffi cients in the detection branch for linear combination, it achieves fast 5real-time segmentation while maintaining acceptable accuracy. SparseInst innovatively introduces a sparse instance represen-tation approach [60]. By utilizing sparse points to encode in-stances, the method empowers the model to directly predict these sparse points from images for instance reconstruction. This design e ff ectively mitigates the substantial redundant com-putations inherent in conventional instance segmentation tech-niques. Tian et al.[61] presents a fully-convolutional architec-ture. It leverages a set of dynamic convolution kernels to predict the convolution parameters of the Mask branch. This approach attains high accuracy with an limited number of pre-set mask branch parameters which are only 169. Moreover, it e ff ectively strikes a balance between real-time performance and accuracy. Transformer-based methods, such as Mask2former [62], adopt the Cross Attention design concept from the DETR object de-tection architecture. They abstract the instance segmentation process into a mask classification problem and accomplish in-stance segmentation by predicting binary masks corresponding to di ff erent categories. However, Transformer models come with certain limitations. They demand a vast amount of data for training. Real-time inference and detection are challenging to implement because their computational complexity is restricted by multi-head attention mechanisms, which is usually exponen-tial. In summary, while the aforementioned methods all possess their own merits, there remains a dearth of specific enhance-ments tailored to the formidable leaf scenarios characterized by significant overlaps, inadequate illumination, and a wide vari-ety of morphologies. This paper puts forward an instance seg-mentation algorithm named LeafInst, which is grounded in the optimization of the anchor-free CondInst network[61]. This al-gorithm e ff ectively tackles the aforementioned problem. 

3. Methodology 

LeafInst is an algorithm framework specifically designed for leaf instance segmentation as shown in Figure 3. Next, we will explain the component modules and specific functions of the model in the order of feature flow input, starting from the over-all view and then delving into the details. In the Neck part of the model, we integrate the Asymptotic Feature Pyramid Net-work technology for multi-scale feature extraction. This meets the stringent requirements of leaf extraction for skeletal fea-tures and compensates for the loss of the receptive field of fea-tures at di ff erent resolutions. The details will be elaborated in Section 3.1. At the Head end, we propose a novel Dynamic Anomalous Regression Head (DARH) module. It incorporates Dynamic Asymmetric Spatial Perception (DASP) within four di ff erent types of feature extraction branches and dual-residual feature fusion strategy. By using four di ff erent shapes of convo-lution operations, it can capture the features of deformed leaves and successfully helps the model recognize multi-variant defor-mation feature maps. The details will be elaborated in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. After extracting these original features, we input them into a unified multi-scale feature fusion module, namely Top-down Concatenation-decoder Feature Fusion (TCFU) re-placing original Top-down Pixel-wise Addition method. This method e ff ectively avoids redundant calculations of low - level features, prevents the problem of feature information weight loss caused by repeated weighting, and improves the feature re-combination in the region of interest. The details will be elabo-rated in Section 3.5. 

3.1. Model Neck 

Multi-scale features play a crucial role in encoding objects with scale variations in object detection tasks. A common strategy for multi-scale feature extraction is to adopt the clas-sic top-down and bottom-up Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN). However, these methods su ff er from the loss or degradation of feature information, which weakens the fusion e ff ect of non-adjacent levels. Inspired by Yang et al.[63], we leverage spa-tial features at di ff erent levels for dynamic interaction, forming the ASFF operation. Specifically, we first unify the resolutions through the identity alignment method between di ff erent levels. Downsampling is generally achieved through max - pooling and convolution, while upsampling is typically realized via linear interpolation. This process can be seen in Figure 4. Then, by training a set of learnable weight parameters, we dynamically adjust the contribution of each feature layer at each level. The formula is simplified as follows: 

Xn→i = map( Xn) , (1) ˜Fi = αi · Xn→i + · · · + γi · Xi→i, (2) where αi, . . . , γ i are learnable weighting parameters, map( ·) de-notes the identity alignment operation between di ff erent feature levels, and ˜Fi represents the feature map at the i-th level pro-duced by the AFPN neck. In addition, traditional mask branches typically employ a top-down, pixel-wise additive feature fusion strategy during the segmentation stage. However, this fusion operation is essentially identical to that adopted in the upstream Neck stage, which results in repeated weighting of low-level features throughout the feature fusion process. Such redundancy not only leads to feature duplication but also suppresses the e ff ec-tive utilization of high-resolution features, thereby hindering subsequent feature decoding. To address this issue, we fur-ther propose a Top-down Concatenation-decoder Feature Fu-sion (TCFU) strategy to mitigate feature redundancy and en-hance high-resolution feature representation. 

3.2. Dynamic Anomalous Regression Head 

Dynamic Anomalous Regression Head (DARH) is a novel unified anchor-free detection head proposed by us, which can be used to replace the detection head for di ff erent models. The purpose of this head is to improve the detection end accuracy at a lightweight cost. A large number of experiments demon-strate that relying solely on convolutional branches with local dependencies is insu ffi cient for e ff ective feature integration at the neck stage, because leaf instances exhibit high variability in both shape and scale in natural environments. Since the leaf sway under the influence of wind, how to extract these defor-mation features poses a challenge. Additionally, high-density 6Figure 5: The workflow of dynamic anomalous regression head. 

instance scenarios such as forestry leaves segmentation, present a di ffi culty for some transform-based decoders because their lack of “local view” (the downstream comparison experiments demonstrated this point). In contrast, DARH adopts a shared detection head across multiple feature scales with unified pa-rameters, enabling consistent feature fusion while maintaining local sensitivity to deformation and scale variations. The input to DARH is a feature map from the neck, denoted as ˜ Fi ∈ RC×H×W , where ˜ Fi represents the feature at the i-th level of the feature pyramid. This feature map is first processed by a depthwise separable convolution to expand the channel dimen-sion. The channel expansion is designed to enable downstream branches to adaptively and evenly select informative compo-nents from the feature maps in a learnable manner. The formu-lation is given as follows: ˜Fup i = ∂BN DWConv  ˜Fi

 , (3) where ∂(·) denotes the ReLU activation function, BN( ·) denotes batch normalization, and DWConv( ·) represents the depthwise separable convolution operation. Then, this extended feature is divided into four equal parts along the channel dimension through a linear mapping, ensur-ing that the input of each branch is the same as the original input. Then, we use the DASP branches to integrate di ff erent shapes of features and concatenate them to recover the chan-nels’ depth compared to ˜Fup i , the details will be elaborate in next section. The overview formula is as follow: ˜FDi = Concat DASP Split  ˜Fup i

 , (4) where Split( ·) denotes a linear mapping that evenly partitions the input feature map along the channel dimension, DASP( ·)represents the set of shape-invariant convolution branches, and Concat( ·) concatenates the resulting branch features along the channel dimension. ˜FDi denotes the output feature map of the DASP module. To preserve the long-range dependencies of features and eliminate the local field of view e ff ects of convolution, we present dual-residual structure to restore features. The formula is as follows: ˜Fout i = β · ˜Fi + ∂BN ∆ ˜Fup i + α · ˜FTi

 , (5) where α and β are dynamic weighting factors that control the contribution of feature restoration from di ff erent branches. ∆(·)denotes a dimensionality expansion convolution used to align channel dimensions, BN( ·) denotes batch normalization, and 

∂(·) denotes the ReLU activation function. Here, ˜FTi repre-sents the concatenated feature map obtained from the DASP branches. Subsequently, the output feature map ˜ Fout i is used to predict bounding box coordinates and pixel-wise centerness scores. This regression process operates in parallel with a classifica-tion branch implemented by a standard convolutional decoder. 7Figure 6: The feature visualization maps of dynamic asymmetric spatial perception. 

Centerness is a scalar metric originally proposed by Tian et al.[61], which serves as a proxy for estimating how close a pixel location is to the geometric center of its corresponding ground-truth bounding box. By assigning higher scores to pix-els near the object center and suppressing those farther away, centerness guides the network to focus on more reliable candi-date regions for object localization. This mechanism is widely adopted in anchor-free object detection frameworks. By jointly leveraging centerness prediction and bounding box regression, anchor-free detectors avoid the need for generating multi-scale anchor boxes at each pixel location and subsequently filtering them via NMS, thereby significantly improving computational effi ciency. The formulation is given as follows: 

centerness =

s

min (l∗, r∗)

max (l∗, r∗) · min (t∗, b∗)

max (t∗, b∗) , (6) where l∗, r∗, t∗, b∗ respectively refer to the distance between the pixel and the left, right, upper, and lower boundaries of the GT Bounding Box. centerness is used to describe the degree of combing between pixel points and the center of the target. Following the method proposed by them, a conditional con-troller is employed to dynamically predict the parameters of the mask head FCN. Specifically, for each detected instance, the controller predicts a total of 169 parameters based on the out-put features of the detection head, enabling instance-specific mask generation with a favorable trade-o ff between accuracy and computational cost. Motivated by this design, and leverag-ing the decoupled structure between the regression and classi-fication branches in DARH, we likewise adopt the output fea-ture map ˜ Fout i as controller features to dynamically predict mask weights. The formula is as follows: 

θi = Controller  ˜Fout i

 , θi = [wi,1, wi,2, . . . , wi,169 ], (7) 

nW(1)  

> i

, W(2)  

> i

, W(3) 

> i

o = Split( θi) , (8) Conv j(·) = Conv ·; W( j)

> i

 , j ∈ { 1, 2, 3}. (9) where Controller( ·) denotes the conditional controller module that maps the detection feature ˜ Fout i to an instance-specific pa-rameter vector θi ∈ R169 . The vector θi = [wi,1, wi,2, . . . , wi,169 ]contains the dynamically predicted convolutional parameters for the i-th instance. The operator Split( ·) partitions θi into three parameter groups {W(1)  

> i

, W(2)  

> i

, W(3)  

> i

}, which are used to param-eterize the dynamic convolution layers in the mask head. Here, Conv j(·) denotes the j-th dynamic convolution operation with instance-specific weights W( j) 

> i

, where j ∈ { 1, 2, 3}.8Figure 7: Di ff erent feature fusion strategies. (a) Top-down Concatenation -decoder Feature Fusion (b) Top-down Pixel-wise Addition Feature Fusion. 

3.3. Dynamic Asymmetric Spatial Perception 

Dynamic Asymmetric Spatial Perception is specifically de-signed to capture features of di ff erent scales and shapes. This module can be integrated with any other downstream tasks, in-cluding but not limited to leaf instance segmentation. The struc-tual diagram can be seen in Figure 5. Next, we will demonstrate the function of this module through feature map visualization. For forestry scenarios, the leaves exhibit irregular swaying. This can result in horizontal, vertical, and concentrated distri-bution of features. To capture the features of these anomalies, we designed a shape invariant convolution module. Firstly, fea-ture maps from di ff erent levels are extracted through horizon-tal convolution, vertical convolution, deep convolution, and de-formable convolution. The specific process can be seen in Fig-ure 6. Let ˜Fup i denote the upsampled feature map at pyramid level i. We split ˜ Fup i into multiple feature groups and feed them into the shape-invariant convolution branches. The formulas are as follows: 

n ˜Fup ,(1)  

> i

, ˜Fup ,(2)  

> i

, ˜Fup ,(3)  

> i

, ˜Fup ,(4) 

> i

o = Split  ˜Fup i

 , (10) ˜Fhi = HorizontalConv  ˜Fup ,(1) 

> i

 , (11) ˜Fvi = VerticalConv  ˜Fup ,(2) 

> i

 , (12) ˜Fci = DeepConv  ˜Fup ,(3) 

> i

 , (13) ˜Fsi = DeformConv  ˜Fup ,(4) 

> i

 . (14) where HorizontalConv( ·) and VerticalConv( ·) denote the horizontal and vertical convolution branches, respectively, DeepConv( ·) denotes the deep convolution branch, and DeformConv( ·) denotes the deformable convolution branch. The resulting feature maps ˜Fhi , ˜Fvi , ˜Fci , and ˜Fsi correspond to the outputs of the horizontal, vertical, deep, and deformable branches, respectively. The kernel size of horizontal and vertical convolutions is af-fected by the resolution downsampling ratio: S tride . For mod-els with high downsampling rates, we will use a lower convo-lution kernel size K. In this experiment, we let K be equally to 3. Then, concatenate the multivariate feature maps and apply a linear projection to obtain the preliminary fusion feature layer: ˜FTi . The formula is as follows: ˜FTi = Linear Concat  ˜Fhi , ˜Fvi , ˜Fci , ˜Fsi

 , (15) where Concat( ·) concatenates the branch feature maps 

{ ˜Fhi , ˜Fvi , ˜Fci , ˜Fsi } along the channel dimension, and Linear( ·) de-notes a linear projection that maps the concatenated features to a fixed channel dimension. By default, the output channel di-mension is set to 256 × 4, thereby restoring the feature depth after channel partitioning. Finally, we design a residual structure to preserve the origi-nal information of the feature map. Specifically, the upsampled feature map ˜ Fup i is scaled by a fixed factor α = 0.3 and added to the preliminary fused feature representation, forming the final output. ˜FDi = ˜Fup i · α + ˜FTi , (16) where ˜ FDi represents the final output feature map of the DSAP module. The feature layer is then input into the second residual branch to resotre original information for futher, and finally the feature will be input into TCFU model for feature fuision to enhance the mask end precision. 

3.4. Top-down Concatenation - decoder Feature Fusion 

This subsection focuses on exploring the impacts of two dif-ferent feature fusion strategies on feature integration. Figure 7 shows schematic diagrams of the two feature strategies. (b) il-lustrates Top-down Pixel-wise Addition Feature Fusion, a com-monly used operation for feature fusion after the Neck stage. Its core concept involves upsampling low-level features and in-tegrating them with high-level features through pixel-wise ad-dition to capture long-range dependencies. The formula is as 9follows: 

F′ 

> i+1

= U F′

> i

 + Fi+1, (17) where U(·) denotes the bilinear interpolation operation for fea-ture upsampling, Fi represents the feature map at the i-th pyra-mid level, F′ 

> i

denotes the fused feature map propagated from the previous level, and Fi+1 denotes the original feature map at level i + 1. Accordingly, F′ 

> i+1

represents the fused feature map at level i + 1. The original intention behind this approach is that low-level and high-level features focus on di ff erent aspects: low-level features contain more edge and texture details, while high-level features provide more holistic contour descriptions. Adding them together seems to address the issue of insu ffi cient edge details in high-level features. However, upon re-examining this scheme, it becomes evident that it leads to feature redundancy. Specifically, the texture details of low-level features are repeat-edly weighted at the Neck stage. If top-down pixel-wise addi-tion continues at the Mask stage, the weights of these details in the response feature layer become excessively high, causing the model to overlook holistic contour features. As illustrated in Fig. 7(a), we introduce the Top-down Concatenation-decoder Feature Fusion (TCFU) module, which is designed to rebalance the contributions of hierarchical fea-tures. This module adopts a recursive fusion strategy. Specifi-cally, for each layer except the first, the input feature F′ 

> i

origi-nating from the concatenation of the previous layer is first pro-cessed by a convolution with C/2 filters to reduce its channel dimensionality. Subsequently, a series of transposed convolu-tions are applied to upsample the feature map to match the spa-tial resolution of the next layer. Finally, the upsampled features are concatenated with the corresponding features of the next layer and recursively fed into the subsequent fusion stage. The formula is as follows: 

F′ 

> i+1

= Concat  T  ∆ F′

> i

 , Fi+1

 , (18) where ∆(·) denotes a convolutional projection used for channel dimensionality reduction, T (·) denotes the transposed convo-lution operation for spatial upsampling, and Concat( ·, ·) repre-sents channel-wise feature concatenation. Here, F′ 

> i

denotes the fused feature map propagated from the previous pyramid level, and F′ 

> i+1

represents the resulting fused feature map at level i+1. The advantage of this approach is that it assigns train-able convolutional parameters to the feature weighting process, rather than simply emphasizing through straightforward addi-tion. Direct addition implies a human prior that "details are more important," which is unfair in certain scenarios. First, the model integrates critical information from the channel dimen-sions of the previous layer through dimensionality reduction. It then emphasizes the ROI in spatial features via transposed convolutions. Finally, concatenating with the next layer and re-cursively helps reduce feature redundancy. 

3.5. Loss Function 

The proposed framework jointly predicts object class prob-abilities, bounding box coordinates, centerness scores, and in-stance segmentation masks. The overall training objective is formulated as a multi-task loss: 

L = λcls Lcls + λbbox Lbbox + λcent Lcent + λmask Lmask , (19) where the weights for the classification and centerness losses are set to 0.5, and those for the bounding box regression and mask losses are set to 2.0. 

Classification loss.. To address the severe foreground– background imbalance in dense instance segmentation espe-cially in forestry scene, we adopt the focal loss: 

Lcls = − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

α (1 − pi)γ log( pi), (20) where pi denotes the predicted probability for the leaf at loca-tion i, α is a class-balancing factor, γ is the focusing parameter, and N is the number of training samples. In our experiments, 

α = 0.25 and γ = 2.0. 

Bounding box regression loss.. Bounding box localization is supervised using the Generalized Intersection-over-Union (GIoU) loss. Given a predicted bounding box ˆ b and its cor-responding ground-truth box b, the GIoU is defined as: GIoU( b, ˆb) = IoU( b, ˆb) − C \ (b ∪ ˆb)

|C| , (21) where C denotes the smallest enclosing box covering both b

and ˆ b, and | · | represents the area of a region. The bounding box regression loss is then formulated as: 

Lbbox = 1 − GIoU( b, ˆb). (22) 

Centerness loss.. Following anchor-free detection frameworks, a centerness branch is introduced to suppress low-quality pre-dictions far from leaves’ centers. The ground-truth centerness target is defined as before in Eq(6). 

Lcent = − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

ci log(ˆ ci) + (1 − ci) log(1 − ˆci) . (23) where c denotes centerness here, ˆ c denotes the prediction value. 

Mask loss.. For instance segmentation, we employ the Dice loss to directly optimize the overlap between predicted and ground-truth masks: 

Lmask = 1 − 2 P j ˆm jm j + ϵ

P j ˆm2 

> j

+ P j m2 

> j

+ ϵ , (24) where ˆ m j and m j denote the predicted and ground-truth mask values at pixel j, and ϵ is a small constant for numerical stabil-ity. 

4. Experiment Settings 

This section provides a complete introduction to our study area, dataset production process, evaluation metrics, and exper-imental details. 10 Figure 8: Study area and dataset production. 

> Figure 9: Examples of di ff erent scenarios. (a) Forestry Dataset: Poplar-leaf, (b) Agriculture Dataset: PhenoBench.

4.1. Dataset and Study Area 

Poplar-leaf : Acquiring High-Quality Datasets to Address Forestry Breeding Challenges. To tackle the challenges in forestry breeding, we selected the poplar plantation in the Huanghai Seaside National Forest Park, Dongtai City, Jiangsu Province, China, located at 32 ◦51 ′ N, 120 ◦50 ′ E, as our research area. The specific information is shown in Figure 8. Spanning over 13,000 km 2, this region features dense poplar forests with luxuriant branches. Composed of 3-year-old poplar seedlings with a breast diameter of 3-8 cm and relatively sparse branches, the plantation includes two sub-areas with distinct environmen-tal conditions: soil and water sources, providing a basis for comparative data analysis under di ff erent scenarios. Data col-lection was conducted using a DJI M350RTK drone equipped with a P1 camera. The drone flew at a 5-meter altitude along pre-set survey routes and captured multi-angle images around individual trees to obtain high-resolution aerial imagery from diverse perspectives. For annotation, we used LabelMe soft-ware to perform pixel-level instance labeling on each tree, cov-ering 1,202 leaf branches and 19,876 leaf instances, with mask and bounding box information for each leaf. An 8-person team completed the labeling task over 7 days, using the built-in SAM model for initial processing followed by fine-grained manual verification and correction. To ensure coverage of all forest areas, we selected images with a repetition rate ≤30% for la-beling. The dataset consists of 1,202 labeled images, which are split into an 8:1:1 ratio for training, validation, and testing, each with a resolution of 1,024 × 1,024 pixels, and guarantees that 80% of images contain ≥8 leaf instances per frame. Mean-while, we implemented data augmentation using two strategies: 1. Random horizontal flipping with a probability of 50%, and 2. Random illumination adjustment within the range of 0.8 to 11 Figure 10: Qualitative comparison results with di ff erent models on Poplar-leaf 

1.1. Additionally, we provide 40.8 GB of unlabeled leaf im-ages covering nearly all young poplar trees in the region, suit-able for transfer learning and unsupervised network training. As the first large-scale dataset for leaf instance segmentation in forestry, Poplar-leaf establishes a foundational resource for the field. Unlike agricultural crop leaf datasets, which focus on relatively single species, this dataset captures leaf instances under natural light and growth conditions from diverse drone angles. It o ff ers forestry researchers abundant samples to study leaf growth patterns, morphological characteristics, and physi-ological ecology. Through analysis of numerous leaf instances, insights into tree growth mechanisms can be gained, providing a robust foundation for forestry breeding, cultivation, and re-lated research. 

PhenoBench : A large-scale public dataset specifically de-signed for semantic image interpretation in the agricultural field, proposed by Weyler et al[64]. The dataset provides RGB images recorded by drones equipped with high-resolution cam-eras under real field conditions. They used a DJI M600 with a Phase One iXM - 100 camera, which was equipped with an 80 mm RSM fixed - focus lens and mounted on a gimbal to obtain motion - stabilized RGB images with a resolution of 11664 × 8750 pixels. The drone flew at an altitude of approx-imately 21 m, and the ground sampling distance (GSD) was 1 mm /pixel. After manual cropping and annotation by the au-thor’s team, each image patch was sized at 1024 × 1024 pix-els. They provided leaf segmentation instances of sugar beet crops and weeds. We selected the leaf instance part to verify the model’s transferability. Sample images from the two datasets are shown in Figure 9. Compared with the public dataset, our dataset covers im-ages captured from diverse UAV viewing angles, enabling the observation of open-scene forestry images with varying leaf de-formations and perspectives. In contrast, PhenoBench only pro-vides orthorectified remote sensing imagery from a single view-ing angle. 

4.2. Evaluation Metrics 

In the quantitative comparison, we adopted standard COCO Metrics to measure the model’s performance. Specifically, we applied Box and segmentation metrics to evaluate the model’s performance, respectively. The Average Precision (AP) met-rics under di ff erent Intersection of Union (IoU) thresholds were used to quantitatively analyze the model’s accuracy. IoU mea-sures the degree of overlap between two regions by calculating the ratio of the intersection area to the union area of the two re-gions. In object detection tasks, these two regions are typically the prediction box (the target position predicted by the model) and the ground-truth box (the actual target position). In image segmentation tasks, they are the predicted segmentation region and the ground-truth segmentation region. The formula is as follows: 

IoU = Pred T GT Pred S GT , (25) 12 Figure 11: Qualitative comparison results with di ff erent models on Phenobench.    

> Table 1
> Poplar-Leaf Validation Results (%): : 1st place, : 2nd place, : 3rd place.

Methods seg /mAP seg /AP50 seg /AP75 box /mAP box /AP50 box /AP75 Queryinst 56.9 76.4 62.1 55.3 75.3 60.2 CascadeRcnn 63.6 84.7 72.3 64.1 84.6 71.4 MaskRcnn 61.8 86.5 68.5 61.5 86.4 67.5 Solo 56.8 80.9 63.0 – – –SoloV2 65.3 86.7 71.6 – – –PointRend 64.4 86.5 70.5 62.2 86.4 69.4 BoxInst 58.2 85.3 64.1 62.3 85.8 68.6 YOLOV8 61.9 87.6 – 64.5 87.8 –YOLOV11 62.2 88.1 – 64.6 87.6 –YOLACT 54.0 77.1 57.8 49.0 76.6 55.1 Mask2former 56.4 75.6 60.9 53.7 72.4 56.9 MaskDino 65.3 84.9 70.9 61.1 82.2 64.7 SparseInst 43.1 66.5 45.6 – – –LeafInst 68.4 88.9 73.8 65.6 87.8 72.5 where Pred denotes the predication results, GT denotes the ground truth of the images. The formula is as follows: 

Precision = T P T P + FP , (26) 

Recall = T P T P + FN , (27) where T P (True Positive) represents the instances correctly identified and classified by the model. FP (False Positive) refers to the instances incorrectly identified as positive by the model but are actually negative. FN (False Negative) indicates the actual positive instances that the model fails to detect or classify correctly. In the COCO evaluation criteria, the mean average precision (mAP) is obtained by averaging the AP values across multiple intersection-over-union (IoU) thresholds ranging from 0.50 to 0.95 with a step of 0.05, providing a comprehensive assessment of a model’s object detection and segmentation performance. Additionally, AP50 and AP75 represent the average precision at fixed IoU thresholds of 0.50 and 0.75, respectively. The dif-ference between these two metrics reflects the model’s stability under varying precision requirements, aiding in evaluating its adaptability to di ff erent application scenarios. In addition to the standard COCO metrics, we further intro-duce a manual visual inspection–based leaf-level accuracy to better evaluate model performance in complex forestry scenar-ios. In dense leaf canopies with severe occlusion and frequent overlaps, strict IoU-based criteria may underestimate perceptu-ally correct predictions, especially when minor boundary de-viations exist. Moreover, this manual visual inspection metric is also applicable for quantifying qualitative comparison results of SAM-based models, which do not provide instance-level out-puts or IoU-based evaluation interfaces. In such cases, manual inspection becomes the only feasible way to assess whether in-dividual leaf instances are correctly identified. In addition, this metric is well suited to broader zero-shot transfer scenarios, where precise instance-level contour annotations are unavail-able. Let G = {G1, . . . , GNG } denote the set of ground-truth leaf instances, and P = {P1, . . . , PNP } denote the set of predicted leaf instances. A predicted instance is considered correctly identi-fied if, according to manual visual inspection, it corresponds to a unique ground-truth leaf in terms of spatial location and leaf identity, under a one-to-one matching constraint. The total number of visually correct detections is denoted as T P vis . The 13 Table 2    

> Poplar-Leaf Test Results (%): : 1st place, : 2nd place, : 3rd place.

Methods seg /mAP seg /AP50 seg /AP75 box /mAP box /AP50 box /AP75 Queryinst 58.2 79.7 64.4 55.7 79.2 59.5 CascadeRcnn 62.3 83.0 69.3 62.4 83.0 69.8 MaskRcnn 62.1 90.7 68.8 61.2 89.8 65.2 Solo 57.9 84.3 65.1 – – –SoloV2 64.9 88.6 71.7 – – –PointRend 63.6 85.0 70.5 61.7 84.6 68.2 BoxInst 57.9 87.9 64.9 61.2 88.1 66.4 YOLOV8 62.0 89.7 – 65.7 90.5 –YOLOV11 62.9 89.3 – 64.9 90.4 –YOLACT 50.3 78.6 53.4 45.7 79.2 47.7 Mask2former 58.0 78.6 53.4 55.1 75.6 58.0 MaskDino 63.5 85.7 68.9 57.8 81.1 60.1 SparseInst 43.5 68.9 45.5 – – –LeafInst 70.0 91.9 77.0 65.8 90.4 71.0   

> Table 3
> Quantitative Comparison of Di ff erent Methods on PhenoBench (%): : 1st place, : 2nd place.

Methods box /mAP box /AP50 seg /mAP seg /AP50 LeafInst 52.7 82.3 50.2 80.5 YOLOv8 48.6 78.4 45.7 76.0 YOLOv11 47.5 77.7 45.6 75.9 MaskDINO 49.3 80.2 51.0 80.3 manual visual inspection accuracy is defined as: 

Accuracy vis = T P vis 

NG

, (28) where NG denotes the total number of ground-truth leaf in-stances. This metric measures the proportion of leaves that are successfully recognized by the model from a human perceptual perspective. By complementing IoU-based quantitative metrics with manual visual inspection, we provide a more comprehen-sive evaluation of model robustness and practical applicability, particularly for fine-grained leaf instance segmentation under varying scales, viewpoints, and illumination conditions. 

4.3. Experiments Setups 

All experiments were conducted on a system equipped with an AMD Ryzen 9 7950X 16-core processor and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 graphics card (24GB VRAM), running the Ubuntu 22.04 operating system. The experiments utilized CUDA 11.8 and PyTorch 2.1.0, with model training and in-ference implemented based on the mmdetection and ultralytics frameworks. All models were trained for 36 epochs or 8064 it-erations (the two are equivalent). The SGD optimizer was used with an initial learning rate of 0.005, a batch size of 4, and linear learning rate warm-up with a start_factor of 0.01 over 400 itera-tions. The learning rate decay exponent was 0.5, with decay ap-plied at the 2 /3 and 4 /5 points of training. The input image res-olution was 1024 × 1024. Slightly di ff erent training strategies were applied to di ff erent models to optimize their performance. The backbone used was ResNet50, loaded with ImageNet pre-trained weights [65]. All metrics were calculated using built-in scripts from o ffi cial libraries. The specific training strategies for our model have been open-sourced at Github. 

5. Results 

In this experiment, we used both quantitative and qualita-tive methods to analyze our results. Our analysis covered most of the common methods in the field of instance seg-mentation in recent years, namely: QueryInst [66], Cascade-Mask R-CNN, CondInst, Mask R-CNN, SOLO, SOLOv2, PointRend [67], BoxInst [68], YOLOv8-Seg, YOLOv11-Seg, YOLACT, Mask2Former, MaskDINO [69], SparseInst, and LeafInst. These methods encompass di ff erent branch models in the fields of object detection and instance segmentation. Ad-ditionally, we also compare to the Segment Anything(SAM) Large Vision model to validate the performence of our method. 

5.1. Quantitative Results 

The quantitative results are divided into two parts, corre-sponding to experiments conducted on the Poplar-leaf dataset and the PhenoBench dataset, respectively. All models were trained under strictly identical experimental configurations. The quantitative results are summarized in Table 1 and Ta-ble 2, which reports the validation and test set results on the Poplar-leaf dataset. The experiments demonstrate that the pro-posed LeafInst model achieves leading performance across the 14 Figure 12: Visualization comparison with Visual Foundation Models. (a) Input (b) LeafInst (c) SAM (d) Fast-SAM (e) semantic-SAM 

vast majority of evaluation metrics. On the Poplar-leaf valida-tion set, LeafInst achieves a seg-mAP score of 68.4, indicat-ing that the model is capable of capturing more fine-grained feature information and producing the most accurate segmenta-tion results under comprehensive scenarios. As the IoU thresh-old increases, for example, the seg-AP50 reaches 88.9, which also ranks first among all compared models, slightly surpass-ing YOLOv11-Seg at 88.1. In terms of Box metrics, our model remains highly competitive and even outperforms frameworks specialized for object detection. By introducing the DARH head at the object detection stage and increasing the loss weight of the Box branch, the model significantly improves bounding box regression performance while maintaining stable segmen-tation accuracy. Compared with the latest Transformer-based architectures, LeafInst still shows a clear advantage. Notably, MaskDINO achieves a seg-mAP of 65.3 (ranked second) and a box-mAP of 61.1, both of which are lower than LeafInst’s 68.4 and 65.6, respectively, demonstrating the potential of our architecture. In the test set comparison, LeafInst continues to achieve the highest overall scores. It is worth noting that the test set primarily consists of large-scale leaf samples captured at close range, which places greater emphasis on cross-scale in-ference ability than the validation set. The results show that LeafInst ranks first across all five evaluation metrics. In partic-ular, its seg-mAP reaches 70.0, which is 5.1% higher than the second-best method, SoloV2 (64.9). Although its box perfor-mance under IoU = 50 is slightly lower than that of YOLOv8 (-0.01), its average box-mAP is higher (65.8). On the PhenoBench dataset, we select the most competitive models for comparison, and the quantitative results are reported in Table 3. The results show that LeafInst achieves the high-est box-mAP of 52.7, significantly outperforming the remain-ing models and exceeding MaskDINO by 3.4 points (49.3). Meanwhile, LeafInst also ranks first in box-AP50 with a score of 82.3, further demonstrating its strong localization accuracy under IoU =50. For segmentation metrics, although LeafInst’s seg-mAP (50.2) is slightly lower than that of MaskDINO (51.0, -0.8), it still remains among the top-tier models. In addition, 15 Figure 13: Accuracy and convergence analysis. 

LeafInst achieves a seg-AP50 score of 80.5, slightly surpassing MaskDINO’s 80.3 ( +0.2). These two datasets represent forestry UAV leaf damage scenarios and agricultural orthophoto remote sensing scenarios, respectively. Together, they further demon-strate that under complex and challenging conditions, LeafInst consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both in-stance segmentation and object detection tasks overall. 

5.2. Qualitative Results 

As shown in Figure 10, the visualization results of all models on the Poplar-leaf validation set are presented, with prediction results listed from left to right. Blue and yellow bounding boxes in the figures are used to zoom in on details for clearer elabo-ration. We selected images under di ff erent leaf morphologies and lighting conditions for display. In the visualization scheme, each instance is drawn in red, accompanied by a black bound-ing box to show the box prediction results, which also helps researchers compare models under the same pattern more e ff ec-tively. The results indicate that our model’s drawn leaf bound-aries are more consistent with the label annotations in the GT maps for identifying various abnormal leaves, and it can even predict some boundaries overlooked by humans. Meanwhile, some networks such as MaskDino, Mask2former fall into vi-sual hallucinations, which result it some duplicate detections. Compared to most of existing methods, LeafInst demonstrate its compatibility capability to segment poplar’s leafs under dif-ferent regions. This may stem from the enhanced extraction of abnormal features by the integrated DASP module, while also reflecting that the AFPN module better integrates the basic fea-ture information of the backbone network. As shown in Figure 11, these are the visualization results of the model on PhenoBench. All models were trained on Poplar-leaf without specific adaptation to PhenoBench. The application to the PhenoBench dataset relies entirely on zero-shot transfer learning from our dataset and models themselves. Therefore, we used colored instance visualization results for plotting on this dataset to evaluate the robustness of di ff erent models in detecting other leaf types. White annotation boxes are used to highlight details requiring attention in the visualiza-tion results, as well as the shortcomings or advantages of each 16 Figure 14: Segmentation results of di ff erent conditions by LeafInst. 

model. As indicated, our model still outperforms other base-line models in transfer capabilities for agricultural leaves across three di ff erent scenarios. Visually, our model demonstrates high precision in segmenting three di ff erent types of agricul-tural leaves in the PhenoBench dataset. It can accurately dis-tinguish both narrow-leaf and broad-leaf crops. Notably, due to the angular overlap in orthographic images, many models like QueryInst often mistake di ff erent leaves from the same plant as a single entity. In contrast, methods such as MaskDino tend to miss fine details in densely packed regions during segmenta-tion tasks. This not only demonstrates the compatibility of our model but also reflects the data support provided by our dataset for phenotypic transfer across various leaves, further validating the robustness of both the model and the dataset. Figure 12 presents a qualitative comparison of segmentation performance between our model and the SAM series under di-verse scene challenges. The selected samples cover variations in scale, illumination, and leaf morphology. Table 4 further reports the manual visual inspection accuracy (Acc) for quanti-tative comparison. Since the SAM series does not provide ex-plicit instance-level outputs, precise IoU-based instance evalu-ation is not applicable. To ensure fairness, visually distinguish-able leaf semantics are treated as leaf instances during manual inspection. LeafInst is trained for 36 epochs on the Poplar-leaf dataset, while most evaluated scenes represent zero-shot transfer scenar-ios, except for the first sample, which is drawn from Poplar-leaf. All SAM-related models are evaluated using o ffi cial pretrained weights released by their authors [70, 71, 72, 73]. As shown in Figure 12-1, under the branch-scale segmentation scenario, our model produces finer and more stable leaf instance boundaries than the SAM series, achieving an Acc of 90.9, which exceeds the second-best semantic-SAM by 4.6 points. Figure 12-2 illus-trates an agricultural scene sampled from PhenoBench, where our model still demonstrates clear superiority with an Acc of 86.6, followed by FastSAM with an Acc of 78.5. Figure 12-3 corresponds to an upward-looking nighttime scene under moonlight illumination, where all models exhibit degraded per-formance due to occlusion and shadow confusion. In this chal-lenging setting, only LeafInst maintains a reasonable perfor-mance, reaching an Acc of 63.1. Figure 12-4 shows a wide-leaf vegetation scene adjacent to a wall, in which semantic-SAM (87.5) and LeafInst (88.8) achieve comparable results. How-ever, in the full-tree-scale evaluation, semantic-SAM slightly outperforms LeafInst with an Acc of 71.0. Overall, while the SAM series shows limitations in specialized leaf instance seg-17 Figure 15: Schematic diagram of phenotypic indicators - taking Leaf#306 as a example. 

> Table 4
> Manual visual inspection accuracy (%) under di ff erent evaluation settings.

Method F1-Acc F2-Acc F3-Acc F4-Acc F5-Acc LeafInst 90.9 86.6 63.1 88.8 66.8 SAM 81.8 28.8 18.4 22.2 –FastSAM 63.6 78.5 32.0 72.2 61.1 semantic-SAM 86.3 67.3 56.3 87.5 71.0 mentation tasks, particularly under scale and illumination vari-ations, LeafInst consistently demonstrates stronger robustness and adaptability across diverse forestry and agricultural scenes. 

5.3. Ablation Study 

This section analyzes the model’s performance on the Poplar-leaf validation dataset under di ff erent parameter set-tings through quantitative methods. The model’s baseline is CondInst. As shown in Table 5, AFPN indicates whether the AFPN module replaces the FPN module; DASP (w /0) means using only two asymmetric convolution branches in the DASP module without shallow-deep convolution branches; DAGH represents the complete built-in DASP module combined with dual-residual structure. TAFU represents Top-down Pixel-wise Addition Feature Fusion. TCFU represents Top-down Concate-nation - decoder Feature Fusion. Weight indicates whether to use a weight of 2.0 to adjust the Box and Mask losses while reducing the centerness loss weight to 0.5. The results show that after replacing FPN with AFPN, the detection performance significantly improves, with box mAP reaching 61.7 ( +1.5). This improvement stems from AFPN’s progressive multi-scale feature aggregation, which facilitates e ff ective information ex-change across di ff erent pyramid levels and enhances the repre-sentation of small-scale features, thereby improving the accu-racy of the segmentation module (seg /AP: 65.6, +0.3). When only fusing DASP (w /o), the model’s performance is disturbed to some extent, indicating that using only asymmetric convolu-tion branches without integrating normal convolution branches leads to the loss of key information. After forming the com-plete DAGH module, this issue is resolved, and the detection performance significantly improves to 64.6 ( +4.0). Meanwhile, improvements in the detection head further benefit the segmen-tation head, resulting in a substantial increase in segmentation performance, with the seg-AP reaching 67.7 ( +3.2). After re-placing TCFU with TAFU, both metrics reached their highest values, with seg-mAP at 68.4 and box-mAP at 65.8. Figure 13 shows the iteration status during our model’s train-ing. We trained for a total of 8,064 iterations with a batch size of 4, equivalent to 36 epochs. The model fitted the dataset at an extremely fast rate, with a stable decline in loss throughout training. By adjusting the weight strategy, we ensured consis-tent loss magnitudes during the search for the optimal solution. The metrics generally trended positively and stabilized after ap-proximately 4200 iterations, indicating that the model had con-verged. 

6. Applications 

To comprehensively demonstrate the value of our model in intelligent forestry breeding, we conducted extensive applica-tion experiments to verify the robustness of the model and data, and provided new possibilities and directions for the integra-tion. We conduct our experiments on two downstream applica-tion tasks. The first task is the application of leaf segmentation and counting in di ff erent scenarios. The second branch is to use LeafInst to establish a regression indicator for calculating leaf growth and vegetation greenness for "early-stage" selection. 18 Table 5 

> Ablation study of di ff erent modules.

Size Baseline AFPN DSAP(w /o) DARH TAFU TCFU Weight seg /mAP box /mAP 512 ✓ ✓ 64.5 59.6 1024 ✓ ✓ 65.3 60.2 1024 ✓ ✓ ✓ 65.6 61.7 1024 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 64.5 60.6 1024 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 67.7 64.6 1024 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 68.4 65.8 

6.1. Leaf Instances Segmentation Under Di ff erent Conditions 

In this subsection, we elaborate on how LeafInst is used for leaf segmentation to verify leaf counting performance, with multiple di ff erent control group environments set up. In terms of scale, the scenarios are divided into single-leaf scenes, branch scenes, and whole-tree scenes. In terms of environ-ment, we compare daytime and nighttime lighting conditions. In terms of leaf species, we introduce leaves of di ff erent species such as tea trees, Nandina domestica, and Trachelospermum jasminoides. These scenarios cover common conditions and hold forestry significance. Importantly, these new scenarios are basically untrained with specific data, relying entirely on the parameters learned by LeafInst from Poplar-leaf for zero-shot transfer learning. The results are shown in Figure14. In the single-leaf scenario, the model completed the leaf segmentation work with pixel-level accuracy. It is worth not-ing that the samples we selected are deciduous leaves, which are yellow in color. However, this still does not a ff ect the model’s ability to recognize the leaf contours, further proving that LeafInst has learned the color and shape features. In the branch scenario, the model successfully identified de-formed leaves of di ff erent shapes by virtue of the asymmetric convolution of the DASP module. In the face of situations such as uneven lighting and overlapping occlusions, LeafInst can identify the position and range of most leaves. It should be noted that sometimes some background leaves are misiden-tified. These errors can be completely filtered out by selecting target boxes with a lower threshold or deleting instances with a too-low pixel range, and they do not a ff ect the application per-formance. In the individual-tree scenario, the trees show various pos-tures, and the branches are obviously o ff set due to the influ-ence of the wind. Moreover, due to the huge sampling scale, the area occupied by a single leaf instance in the picture is ex-tremely small. This is much smaller than the training samples in Poplar-leaf. Even in this highly dense situation, LeafInst still captures the leaf information of young poplar trees with high accuracy. Although there are slight errors in some areas, for example, the yellow branch in the lower left corner of the first column is misidentified. But this is because we downsampled the original image to 1024 × 1024, resulting in the loss of a lot of information, making the image not high-definition. Main-taining the original resolution will alleviate these problems. In short, in the scenario of scale transformation, the model proves its potential capability. In the nighttime scenario, the lighting is insu ffi cient, and the background is completely di ff erent from the well-lit scenarios in Poplar-leaf, which poses a challenge for the model to rec-ognize shadows. The results show that without being trained specifically for shadows, LeafInst has some errors in shadow recognition, that is, it mistakenly identifies shadows as over-lapping leaves. Nevertheless, the model has overcome some of the challenges brought by shadows, which is acceptable in the case of zero-shot training, and it also provides new application possibilities for real-time monitoring of leaf characteristics at night. Under the challenge of leaf scenarios of di ff erent tree species which present d ff erent shape, our model demonstrates adapt-ability and transferability. For example, the Nandina domes-tica in the picture has sharp-shaped leaves, the leaves of vine plants are polygonal, the tea plants have a large number of dense leaves, and the leaves of Trachelospermum jasminoides are slender. These leaf shapes are completely di ff erent from the broad-leaved genus of poplar leaves, but LeafInst still shows acceptable recognition accuracy. 

6.2. Leaf Growth Condition Indicator 

In this section, we will present a novel UAV-RGB image based indicator to calculate the leaf growth condition using our proposed network. We used LeafInst to identify and obtain 1,850 representative leaves from the Poplar-leaf validation set as the research data foundation. Key parameters of each leaf instance were identified to evaluate leaf growth. These parame-ters are vegetation phenotypic indicators computed from the in-stance segmentation masks, with all measurements expressed in pixel units. Using these parameters combined with the entropy weight method, we proposed a new leaf growth condition pa-rameter based on UAV images: Leaf Growth Condition Indica-tor (LGCI). Subsequent experiments suggest that this indicator has the potential to automatically characterize leaves with de-sirable shape properties. The key parameters used for modeling this indicator are divided into two parts. The specific indicators calculation process can be seen in Figure 15. Taking one image as an example, each instance was assigned a unique ID through matching with the original image, and its corresponding pheno-typic indicators were calculated, as shown in Table 6. The first part is shape parameters: length, width, perimeter, area, round-ness, and rectangularity. These indicators measure leaf growth by extracting leaf shapes. Since the spatial variation in a single UAV image is not significant, these indicators are all positive indicators after normalization to eliminate the influence of di-mensions. The formulas for roundness and rectangularity are 19 Table 6 

> Prediction (pred) and Ground Truth (gt) Indicators - taking Leaf#306 as a example

Prediction (Pred) ID width height perimeter area round rect Rm Gm Bm ¯R ¯G ¯B

1 294.00 386.00 1135.99 78915.50 0.77 0.74 43.00 71.00 12.00 44.18 71.65 13.99 2 296.00 299.00 1008.25 60085.50 0.74 0.69 44.00 75.00 10.00 46.94 76.24 12.38 3 176.00 370.00 964.91 48527.50 0.65 0.75 32.00 62.00 6.00 34.16 62.99 8.81 4 173.00 208.00 640.84 26074.00 0.80 0.75 79.00 104.00 12.00 80.73 104.55 12.93 5 132.00 218.00 611.06 17917.50 0.60 0.77 37.00 64.00 11.00 40.81 65.70 13.78 6 249.00 343.00 1002.59 56927.50 0.71 0.69 30.00 58.00 11.00 32.77 59.66 12.34 7 258.00 175.00 856.48 26471.50 0.45 0.60 41.00 73.00 8.00 42.13 73.67 9.74 8 310.00 369.00 1602.36 65113.00 0.32 0.59 23.00 51.00 5.00 26.06 52.05 7.06 10 112.00 244.00 613.24 15567.00 0.52 0.72 91.00 105.00 76.00 88.42 105.04 77.11 12 111.00 132.00 394.72 6371.50 0.51 0.70 83.00 106.00 46.00 87.97 109.40 50.74 13 71.00 292.00 682.62 12598.00 0.34 0.65 58.00 79.00 36.00 59.08 79.47 37.36 14 85.00 104.00 316.59 5903.00 0.74 0.74 124.00 153.00 9.00 122.55 150.32 13.82 Ground Truth (GT) ID width height perimeter area round rect Rm Gm Bm ¯R ¯G ¯B

1 289.00 392.00 1158.51 78377.00 0.73 0.73 43.00 71.00 12.00 44.01 71.52 13.80 2 289.00 293.00 976.00 58223.00 0.77 0.72 44.00 75.00 9.00 46.55 76.03 12.07 3 172.00 374.00 977.44 47354.00 0.62 0.75 32.00 62.00 6.00 33.85 62.79 8.37 4 174.00 213.00 662.11 27172.50 0.78 0.77 79.00 104.00 12.00 80.83 104.31 13.67 5 133.00 216.00 615.50 17864.00 0.59 0.78 37.00 64.00 11.00 40.74 65.75 13.60 6 250.00 357.00 1051.99 56756.50 0.64 0.66 30.00 58.00 11.00 32.78 59.69 12.34 7 258.00 177.00 904.83 26094.50 0.40 0.58 41.00 73.00 8.00 42.66 74.29 9.97 8 313.00 381.00 1714.04 63251.50 0.27 0.54 23.00 50.00 5.00 25.31 51.41 6.54 10 111.00 249.00 625.29 15393.50 0.49 0.73 91.00 104.00 75.00 88.47 105.05 76.91 12 105.00 108.00 357.75 5157.50 0.51 0.70 79.00 104.00 40.00 84.82 108.15 45.07 13 69.00 325.00 789.97 14555.50 0.29 0.70 56.00 77.00 35.00 57.65 78.19 36.09 14 90.00 110.00 333.32 6265.50 0.71 0.74 123.00 153.00 10.00 120.14 147.85 14.12 

> Table 7
> The optimal value of intermediate indicators of colors

Rm ¯R R1/3 R2/3 Gm ¯G G1/3 G2/3 Bm ¯B B1/3 B2/3

80.02 82.50 73.71 87.15 111.68 113.10 105.49 118.38 41.39 44.45 34.40 49.36 as follows: roundness = 4 · π · AC2 , (29) rectangularity = A

(xmax − xmin ) · (ymax − ymin ) , (30) where C denotes the perimeter of a leaf, A denotes the leaf area, and xmin , xmax , ymin , ymax represent the coordinates of the mini-mum bounding rectangle enclosing the leaf. The second part of the indicators focuses on the color infor-mation of the leaves, including the mean, median, and tertiles of each RGB channel. These colors imply internal structural infor-mation of the leaves, such as reflectivity, moisture content, and lesion status of each band. These indicators are intermediate in-dicators that need to be normalized through statistical analysis. The current feasible approach is to convert color features from intermediate indicators to positive indicators through an opti-mal value table. This article focuses on the collected data, and invites forestry experts to select high-quality leaves and con-duct RGB information big data statistics on the high-quality leaves to obtain the optimal value table of these indicators as shown in Table 7. Then, we transform the color features from intermediate-type indicators into positive indicators using it. Next, use LeafInst to predict these indicators. By matching and aligning the predicted instances with the annotated GT one by one, a prediction error map can be obtained. Figure 16 shows the regression curves of the predicted values and GT values of each indicator. Table 8 shows the stastical value of each indi-cator. It can be seen that our model has high prediction accu-racy for most indicators. Most secondary indicators keep high 

R2 score, which are on average of 0.9. Although some indica-tors such as roundness and rectangularity present fluctuations. However, the absolute error of them such as MAE are 0.072, 0.037 respectively, which are low enough to accept this due to the instability inhernet in the calculation of these indicators themselves. The data ensures the accuracy of phenotypic data extraction and provides automatic extraction technical support for subsequent applications. Regarding the alignment strategy, we match the predictions with the GT based on a threshold of the lowest IoU of 50 to ensure no overlap and repetition. Mean-20 Figure 16: Regression curves of predicted and GT secondary Indicators. 

while, to ensure that low - quality leaves are not recorded, we filter out instances with an area of less than 1000 pixels. Fi-nally, we obtained the weight values of LGCI through the en-tropy weight method as shwon in Table 9. This indicator repre-sents the first leaf growth status scoring coe ffi cient derived from UAV-based RGB imagery. Using this indicator, we demonstrate the feasibility of assessing leaf growth status using RGB infor-mation alone, without relying on additional data such as mul-tispectral bands. It can be seen that the shape indicator has a relatively large weight, indicating that among the indicators used to evaluate the growth status of leaves, shape information is of vital importance. Although the secondary indicators of color band information seem to have a relatively low individ-ual weight, when combined, they still play a crucial role in the calculation of the final LGCI. In this way, it is ensured that the calculation of LGCI implicitly contains information about the shape and internal reflectance. As shown in Figure 17, LeafInst uses the LGCI calculation to visualize and judge the growth status of leaf phenotypic in-stances. We calculated the indicators for all predicted instances, mapped them to the range of 0-1, and conducted a qualitative analysis of each instance to evaluate the performance of the in-dicators. A darker shade reflects a better growth status of the plant leaves. Among them, the red rectangular boxes in the fig-ure are used to highlight the recognition results of the positive examples of the model, and the blue rectangular boxes are used to emphasize the results of the negative examples of the model. From the instance prediction diagram to the LGCI visualization diagram, it can be seen that some instances have been screened and deleted due to factors such as small area or IoU overlap. The results show that broad, plump, and fresh green leaves re-ceived a higher LGCI score, while slender and broken leaves re-ceived a lower LGCI score. This demonstrates the application value of this indicator. The high-throughput characteristic of this indicator cannot be achieved by human field surveys. Field surveys are labor-intensive and may involve destructive sam-21 Table 8        

> Statistical table of intermediate indicators. Rmdenotes the median value, ¯ Rdenotes the mean value, R1/3denotes the lower third quartile, R2/3denotes the higher third quartile. Other channels are same as R channel.

Shape Indicators width height perimeter area roundness rectangularity 

R2 0.891 0.864 0.791 0.901 0.475 0.534 RMSE 29.225 36.992 149.790 7554.338 0.111 0.059 MAE 11.370 14.861 72.894 2269.508 0.072 0.037 Color Indicators 

Rm Gm Bm ¯R ¯G ¯B R1/3 G1/3 B1/3 R2/3 G2/3 B2/3

R2 0.994 0.995 0.989 0.989 0.992 0.985 0.989 0.991 0.986 0.992 0.994 0.987 RMSE 3.174 3.016 3.716 4.004 3.742 4.031 4.035 4.023 3.777 3.673 3.386 4.502 MAE 1.151 1.062 1.212 1.925 1.773 1.868 1.121 1.169 1.137 1.504 1.307 1.541 

> Table 9
> Indicator weights of LGCI (keep two decimals)

Shape Indicators Weights width height perimeter area roundness rectangularity 0.15 0.11 0.13 0.30 0.06 0.03 Color Indicators Weights 

Rm Gm Bm ¯R ¯G ¯B R1/3 G1/3 B1/3 R2/3 G2/3 B2/3

0.02 0.03 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.02 pling procedures, which can potentially damage parent plants and increase the risk of contamination. However, by combining this indicator with an instance segmentation model, it is possi-ble to quickly and on a large scale select plants with excellent shapes for cultivation, which has great value in forestry. It pro-vides a technical means and quantitative support for early-stage selection and breeding, which is one of the bottleneck problems in the intelligent breeding of plantation forests at the current stage. 

7. Conclusions 

In this study, we addressed the long-standing challenge of fine-grained forestry leaf phenotypic analysis in open-field environments by proposing a unified instance segmentation framework, LeafInst, together with a high-quality UAV-based dataset. The Poplar-leaf dataset is publicly released as the first pixel-level annotated instance segmentation dataset specifically designed for forestry leaves in natural scenes, capturing sub-stantial variations in scale, illumination, and leaf morphology under real growth conditions. To e ff ectively handle these chal-lenges, LeafInst integrates AFPN to enhance progressive multi-scale feature representation, introduces a Dynamic Anomalous Regression Head with Dynamic Asymmetric Spatial Percep-tion to better model irregular and deformed leaf structures, and employs a Top-down Concatenation–decoder Feature Fusion strategy to alleviate feature redundancy and improve mask de-coding quality. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experi-ments demonstrate that LeafInst consistently outperforms state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods on the Poplar-leaf dataset and shows strong zero-shot transferability on the agri-cultural PhenoBench dataset, indicating robust generalization across di ff erent vegetation scenarios. Furthermore, we demon-strate the practical value of instance-level leaf segmentation by proposing a high-throughput LGCI , which enables quantitative assessment of leaf phenotypic development based on multi-ple secondary traits. These results indicate that the proposed dataset and framework e ff ectively bridge the gap between in-stance segmentation and fine-grained leaf phenotype analysis in open-field forestry scenes, providing a scalable and reliable technical foundation for intelligent forestry breeding and down-stream ecological applications. 

8. Acknownledgement 

This work was supported by Biological Breeding-National Science and Technology Major Project (NO.2023ZD0405605). 

References 

[1] Q. Wang, X. Fan, Z. Zhuang, T. Tjahjadi, S. Jin, H. Huan, Q. Ye, One to all: Toward a unified model for counting cereal crop heads based on few-shot learn-ing, Plant Phenomics 6 (2024) 0271. doi:10.34133/ plantphenomics.0271 .22 Figure 17: Quantitative results of the Leaf Growth Condition Indicator (LGCI) scores. (a, d) Input images; (b, e) instance segmentation results produced by LeafInst (IoU > 0.3); (c, f) LGCI score visualization maps. Red and blue boxes highlight leaf instances exhibiting relatively favorable (positive) and unfavorable (negative) morphological characteristics, respectively 

[2] Y. Ge, Z. Zhu, S. Jin, J. Zang, R. Zhang, Q. Li, Z. Sun, S. Liu, H. Xu, Z. Zhai, Winter wheat yield prediction us-ing uav-based multivariate time series data and variate-independent tokenization, Plant Phenomics 7 (2) (2025) 100039. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphe. 2025.100039 .[3] T. He, Y. Hu, A. Guo, Y. Chen, J. Yang, M. Li, M. Zhang, Quantifying the impact of urban trees on land surface tem-perature in global cities, ISPRS Journal of Photogramme-try and Remote Sensing 210 (2024) 69–79. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2024.03.007 .[4] J. Zeng, X. Shen, K. Zhou, L. Cao, Fo-net: An ad-vanced deep learning network for individual tree identi-fication using uav high-resolution images, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 220 (2025) 323– 338. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs. 2024.12.020 .[5] J. Wang, X. Zhang, Investigation of wildfire impacts on land surface phenology from modis time series in the western us forests, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 159 (2020) 281–295. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2019.11.027 .[6] F. Ochoa, P. G. Brodrick, G. S. Okin, E. Ben-Dor, T. Meyer, D. R. Thompson, R. O. Green, Soil and veg-etation cover estimation for global imaging spectroscopy using spectral mixture analysis, Remote Sensing of Envi-ronment 324 (2025) 114746. doi:https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.rse.2025.114746 .[7] B. Xiang, M. Wielgosz, T. Kontogianni, T. Peters, S. Puliti, R. Astrup, K. Schindler, Automated forest inven-tory: Analysis of high-density airborne lidar point clouds 23 with 3d deep learning, Remote Sensing of Environment 305 (2024) 114078. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.rse.2024.114078 .[8] X. Fan, P. Luo, Y. Mu, R. Zhou, T. Tjahjadi, Y. Ren, Leaf image based plant disease identification using trans-fer learning and feature fusion, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 196 (2022) 106892. doi:https://doi. org/10.1016/j.compag.2022.106892 .[9] R. Bhattarai, P. Rahimzadeh-Bajgiran, A. Weiskittel, A. Meneghini, D. A. MacLean, Spruce budworm tree host species distribution and abundance mapping using multi-temporal sentinel-1 and sentinel-2 satellite imagery, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 172 (2021) 28–40. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.isprsjprs.2020.11.023 .[10] D. Kagan, G. Fuhrmann Alpert, M. Fire, Automatic large scale detection of red palm weevil infestation using street view images, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Re-mote Sensing 182 (2021) 122–133. doi:https://doi. org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2021.10.004 .[11] Y. Zhao, Y. Tian, Y. Sun, Y. Li, The development of forest genetic breeding and the application of genome selection and crispr /cas9 in forest breeding, Forests 13 (12) (2022). 

doi:10.3390/f13122116 .URL https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4907/13/12/ 2116 

[12] J. Skobalski, V. Sagan, H. Alifu, O. Al Akkad, F. A. Lopes, F. Grignola, Bridging the gap between crop breed-ing and geoai: Soybean yield prediction from multispec-tral uav images with transfer learning, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 210 (2024) 260– 281. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs. 2024.03.015 .[13] Y. Yu, Q. Cheng, F. Wang, Y. Zhu, X. Shang, A. Jones, H. He, Y. Song, Crop /plant modeling supports plant breeding: I. optimization of environmental factors in ac-celerating crop growth and development for speed breed-ing, Plant Phenomics 5 (2023) 0099. doi:https://doi. org/10.34133/plantphenomics.0099 .[14] H. Fang, F. Baret, S. Plummer, G. Schaepman-Strub, An overview of global leaf area index (lai): Methods, prod-ucts, validation, and applications, Reviews of Geophysics 57 (3) (2019) 739–799. doi:https://doi.org/10. 1029/2018RG000608 .[15] J. Gao, K. Wang, X. Zhang, Patterns and drivers of com-munity specific leaf area in china, Global Ecology and Conservation 33 (2022) e01971. doi:https://doi. org/10.1016/j.gecco.2021.e01971 .[16] D. Kükenbrink, M. Marty, N. Rehush, M. Abegg, C. Gin-zler, Evaluating the potential of handheld mobile laser scanning for an operational inclusion in a national forest inventory – a swiss case study, Remote Sensing of Envi-ronment 321 (2025) 114685. doi:https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.rse.2025.114685 .[17] C. Mulverhill, N. C. Coops, T. Hermosilla, J. C. White, M. A. Wulder, Evaluating icesat-2 for monitor-ing, modeling, and update of large area forest canopy height products, Remote Sensing of Environment 271 (2022) 112919. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. rse.2022.112919 .[18] J. Godziek, Root plates of uprooted trees automatic de-tection and biotransport estimation using lidar data and field mapping, International Journal of Applied Earth Ob-servation and Geoinformation 131 (2024) 103992. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2024.103992 .[19] X. Yan, D. Xie, L. Feng, C. Wu, R. P. Sharma, W. Gao, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Z. Ma, Q. Chen, L. Pang, W. Wang, Q. Ye, S. Tang, L. Fu, Estimating area, standing carbon stock, and potential carbon stock of degraded forests in china, Forest Ecosystems 13 (2025) 100321. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.fecs.2025.100321 .[20] Y. Huang, W. Chen, W. Tan, Y. Deng, C. Yang, X. Zhu, J. Shen, N. Liu, Transfer learning for enhancing the gen-erality of leaf spectroscopic models in estimating crop fo-liar nutrients across growth stages, International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 139 (2025) 104481. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jag.2025.104481 .[21] S. Cai, W. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Yu, X. Liang, Branch ar-chitecture quantification of large-scale coniferous forest plots using uav-lidar data, Remote Sensing of Environ-ment 306 (2024) 114121. doi:https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.rse.2024.114121 .[22] S. Xu, K. Zhou, Y. Sun, T. Yun, Separation of wood and foliage for trees from ground point clouds using a novel least-cost path model, IEEE Journal of Selected Top-ics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 14 (2021) 6414–6425. doi:10.1109/JSTARS.2021. 3090502 .[23] L. Wang, D. Lu, L. Xu, D. T. Robinson, W. Tan, Q. Xie, H. Guan, M. A. Chapman, J. Li, Individual tree species classification using low-density airborne multispectral li-dar data via attribute-aware cross-branch transformer, Re-mote Sensing of Environment 315 (2024) 114456. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2024.114456 .[24] Y. Qin, B. Wu, X. Lei, L. Feng, Prediction of tree crown width in natural mixed forests using deep learning algo-rithm, Forest Ecosystems 10 (2023) 100109. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.fecs.2023.100109 .[25] T. Luo, S. Rao, W. Ma, Q. Song, Z. Cao, H. Zhang, J. Xie, X. Wen, W. Gao, Q. Chen, J. Yun, D. Wu, Yolotree-individual tree spatial positioning and crown 24 volume calculation using uav-rgb imagery and lidar data, Forests 15 (8) (2024). doi:10.3390/f15081375 .URL https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4907/15/8/ 1375 

[26] T. Yun, K. Jiang, G. Li, M. P. Eichhorn, J. Fan, F. Liu, B. Chen, F. An, L. Cao, Individual tree crown segmen-tation from airborne lidar data using a novel gaussian fil-ter and energy function minimization-based approach, Re-mote Sensing of Environment 256 (2021) 112307. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2021.112307 .[27] S. Xu, X. Li, J. Yun, S. Xu, An e ff ectively dynamic path optimization approach for the tree skeleton extrac-tion from portable laser scanning point clouds, Remote Sensing 14 (1) (2022). URL https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/14/1/94 

[28] Z. Mao, Z. Lu, Y. Wu, L. Deng, Dbh estimation for individual tree: Two-dimensional images or three-dimensional point clouds?, Remote Sensing 15 (16) (2023). URL https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/15/16/ 4116 

[29] D. Kagan, G. Fuhrmann Alpert, M. Fire, Automatic large scale detection of red palm weevil infestation using street view images, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Re-mote Sensing 182 (2021) 122–133. doi:https://doi. org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2021.10.004 .[30] M. Gomez Selvaraj, A. Vergara, F. Montenegro, H. Alonso Ruiz, N. Safari, D. Raymaekers, W. Ocimati, J. Ntamwira, L. Tits, A. B. Omondi, G. Blomme, Detec-tion of banana plants and their major diseases through aerial images and machine learning methods: A case study in dr congo and republic of benin, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 169 (2020) 110– 124. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs. 2020.08.025 .[31] S. Bhadra, V. Sagan, S. Sarkar, M. Braud, T. C. Mock-ler, A. L. Eveland, Prosail-net: A transfer learning-based dual stream neural network to estimate leaf chlorophyll and leaf angle of crops from uav hyperspectral images, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 210 (2024) 1–24. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. isprsjprs.2024.02.020 .[32] Y. Wang, Y. Gu, J. Tang, B. Guo, T. A. Warner, C. Guo, H. Zheng, F. Hosoi, T. Cheng, Y. Zhu, W. Cao, X. Yao, Quantify wheat canopy leaf angle distribution using ter-restrial laser scanning data, IEEE Transactions on Geo-science and Remote Sensing 62 (2024) 1–15. doi:10. 1109/TGRS.2024.3353225 .[33] W. Huang, Z. Niu, J. Wang, L. Liu, C. Zhao, Q. Liu, Iden-tifying crop leaf angle distribution based on two-temporal and bidirectional canopy reflectance, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 44 (12) (2006) 3601– 3609. doi:10.1109/TGRS.2006.881755 .[34] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, Segment anything (2023). 

arXiv:2304.02643 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02643 

[35] L. Roth, C. Barendregt, C.-A. Bétrix, A. Hund, A. Wal-ter, High-throughput field phenotyping of soybean: Spot-ting an ideotype, Remote Sensing of Environment 269 (2022) 112797. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. rse.2021.112797 .[36] J. Ren, Y. Shao, Y. Wang, Annual cropping intensity dynamics in china from 2001 to 2023, Remote Sensing 16 (24) (2024). doi:10.3390/rs16244801 .URL https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/16/24/ 4801 

[37] S. Xu, N. Ye, S. X. and, A new method for shore-line extraction from airborne lidar point clouds, Remote Sensing Letters 10 (5) (2019) 496–505. doi:10.1080/ 2150704X.2019.1569277 .[38] Z. Luo, Z. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Chen, C. Wang, A. A. M. Nurunnabi, J. Li, Detection of individual trees in uav lidar point clouds using a deep learning framework based on multichannel representation, IEEE Transactions on Geo-science and Remote Sensing 60 (2022) 1–15. doi:10. 1109/TGRS.2021.3130725 .[39] S. Deng, Q. Xu, Y. Yue, S. Jing, Y. Wang, Individual tree detection and segmentation from unmanned aerial vehicle-lidar data based on a trunk point distribution in-dicator, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 218 (2024) 108717. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. compag.2024.108717 .[40] Y. Wang, X. Yang, L. Zhang, X. Fan, Q. Ye, L. Fu, In-dividual tree segmentation and tree-counting using super-vised clustering, Computers and Electronics in Agricul-ture 205 (2023) 107629. doi:https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compag.2023.107629 .[41] H. Wan, Z. Fan, X. Yu, M. Kang, P. Wang, X. Zeng, A real-time branch detection and reconstruction mechanism for harvesting robot via convolutional neural network and image segmentation, Computers and Electronics in Agri-culture 192 (2022) 106609. doi:https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.compag.2021.106609 .[42] G. Li, R. Suo, G. Zhao, C. Gao, L. Fu, F. Shi, J. Dhupia, R. Li, Y. Cui, Real-time detection of kiwifruit flower and bud simultaneously in orchard using yolov4 for robotic pollination, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 193 (2022) 106641. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. compag.2021.106641 .25 [43] I. Sa, Z. Ge, F. Dayoub, B. Upcroft, T. Perez, C. McCool, Deepfruits: A fruit detection system using deep neural networks, Sensors 16 (8) (2016). 

doi:10.3390/s16081222 .URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/16/8/ 1222 

[44] A. Barreto, L. Reifenrath, R. Vogg, et al., Data augmenta-tion for mask-based leaf segmentation of uav-images as a basis to extract leaf-based phenotyping parameters, Kün-stliche Intelligenz 37 (2023) 143–156. doi:10.1007/ s13218-023-00815-8 .[45] J. Weyler, J. Quakernack, P. Lottes, J. Behley, C. Stach-niss, Joint plant and leaf instance segmentation on field-scale uav imagery, IEEE Robotics and Automation Let-ters 7 (2) (2022) 3787–3794. doi:10.1109/LRA.2022. 3147462 .[46] H. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Jin, L. Bian, Y. Ge, High-throughput phenotyping of plant leaf morphological, physiological, and biochemical traits on multiple scales using optical sensing, The Crop Journal 11 (5) (2023) 1303–1318. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cj. 2023.04.014 .[47] Z. Zhou, H. Zhang, L. Bian, L. Zhou, Y. Ge, Integrating sensor fusion with machine learning for comprehensive assessment of phenotypic traits and drought response in poplar species, Plant Biotechnology Journal (2025). doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.70039 .[48] L. Chen, Y. Fu, K. Wei, D. Zheng, F. Heide, In-stance segmentation in the dark, International Jour-nal of Computer Vision 131 (8) (2023) 2198–2218. 

doi:10.1007/s11263-023-01808-8 .URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ s11263-023-01808-8 

[49] Z. Zhang, S. Fidler, R. Urtasun, Instance-level segmenta-tion for autonomous driving with deep densely connected mrfs (2016). arXiv:1512.06735 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.06735 

[50] J. C. Ángeles Cerón, G. O. Ruiz, L. Chang, S. Ali, Real-time instance segmentation of surgical instruments using attention and multi-scale feature fusion, Medical Image Analysis 81 (2022) 102569. doi:https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.media.2022.102569 .[51] J. Ma, Z. Yang, S. Kim, B. Chen, M. Baharoon, A. Fal-lahpour, R. Asakereh, H. Lyu, B. Wang, Medsam2: Seg-ment anything in 3d medical images and videos (2025). 

arXiv:2504.03600 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03600 

[52] S.-H. Zhang, R. Li, X. Dong, P. L. Rosin, Z. Cai, X. Han, D. Yang, H.-Z. Huang, S.-M. Hu, Pose2seg: Detection free human instance segmentation (2019). arXiv:1803. 10683 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.10683 

[53] K. Chen, C. Liu, H. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Li, Z. Zou, Z. Shi, Rsprompter: Learning to prompt for remote sensing in-stance segmentation based on visual foundation model (2023). arXiv:2306.16269 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.16269 

[54] X. Yan, D. Xie, L. Feng, C. Wu, R. P. Sharma, W. Gao, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Z. Ma, Q. Chen, L. Pang, W. Wang, Q. Ye, S. Tang, L. Fu, Estimating area, standing carbon stock, and potential carbon stock of degraded forests in china, Forest Ecosystems 13 (2025) 100321. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.fecs.2025.100321 .[55] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, J. Sun, Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks (2016). arXiv:1506.01497 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497 

[56] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, Mask r-cnn (2018). arXiv:1703.06870 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06870 

[57] Z. Cai, N. Vasconcelos, Cascade r-cnn: Delving into high quality object detection (2017). arXiv:1712.00726 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.00726 

[58] Z. Tian, C. Shen, X. Wang, H. Chen, Boxinst: High-performance instance segmentation with box annotations (2020). arXiv:2012.02310 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.02310 

[59] D. Bolya, C. Zhou, F. Xiao, Y. J. Lee, Yolact: Real-time instance segmentation (2019). arXiv:1904.02689 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.02689 

[60] T. Cheng, X. Wang, S. Chen, W. Zhang, Q. Zhang, C. Huang, Z. Zhang, W. Liu, Sparse instance activa-tion for real-time instance segmentation (2022). arXiv: 2203.12827 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.12827 

[61] Z. Tian, C. Shen, H. Chen, Conditional convolutions for instance segmentation (2020). arXiv:2003.05664 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.05664 

[62] B. Cheng, I. Misra, A. G. Schwing, A. Kirillov, R. Gird-har, Masked-attention mask transformer for universal im-age segmentation (2022). arXiv:2112.01527 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01527 

[63] G. Yang, J. Lei, H. Tian, Z. Feng, R. Liang, Asymptotic feature pyramid network for labeling pixels and regions, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 34 (9) (2024) 7820–7829. doi:10.1109/ TCSVT.2024.3376773 .[64] J. Weyler, F. Magistri, E. Marks, Y. L. Chong, M. So-dano, G. Roggiolani, N. Chebrolu, C. Stachniss, J. Behley, Phenobench: A large dataset and benchmarks for seman-tic image interpretation in the agricultural domain, IEEE 26 Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-gence 46 (12) (2024) 9583–9594. doi:10.1109/TPAMI. 2024.3419548 .[65] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition (2015). arXiv:1512.03385 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385 

[66] Y. Fang, S. Yang, X. Wang, Y. Li, C. Fang, Y. Shan, B. Feng, W. Liu, Instances as queries (2021). arXiv: 2105.01928 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.01928 

[67] A. Kirillov, Y. Wu, K. He, R. Girshick, Pointrend: Image segmentation as rendering (2020). arXiv:1912.08193 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.08193 

[68] Z. Tian, C. Shen, X. Wang, H. Chen, Boxinst: High-performance instance segmentation with box annotations (2020). arXiv:2012.02310 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.02310 

[69] F. Li, H. Zhang, H. xu, S. Liu, L. Zhang, L. M. Ni, H.-Y. Shum, Mask dino: Towards a unified transformer-based framework for object detection and segmentation (2022). 

arXiv:2206.02777 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.02777 

[70] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, Segment anything (2023). 

arXiv:2304.02643 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02643 

[71] X. Zhao, W. Ding, Y. An, Y. Du, T. Yu, M. Li, M. Tang, J. Wang, Fast segment anything (2023). arXiv:2306. 12156 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.12156 

[72] L. Yang, B. Kang, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, J. Feng, H. Zhao, Depth anything v2 (2024). arXiv:2406.09414 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09414 

[73] F. Li, H. Zhang, P. Sun, X. Zou, S. Liu, J. Yang, C. Li, L. Zhang, J. Gao, Semantic-sam: Segment and recognize anything at any granularity (2023). arXiv:2307.04767 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04767 

27