Title: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.01761v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 03:25:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

Vaggelis Dorovatas 1 Malte Schwerin 2 Andrew D. Bagdanov 3 Lucas Caccia 4 Antonio Carta 5

Laurent Charlin 6 Barbara Hammer 7 Tyler L. Hayes 8 Timm Hess 9 Christopher Kanan 10 

Dhireesha Kudithipudi 11 Xialei Liu 12 Vincenzo Lomonaco 13 Jorge Mendez-Mendez 14 Darshan Patil 6

Ameya Prabhu 15 Elisa Ricci 16 Tinne Tuytelaars 9 Gido M. van de Ven 17 Liyuan Wang 18 

Joost van de Weijer 19 Jonghyun Choi 20 Martin Mundt 2 Rahaf Aljundi 1

# Abstract 

Foundation models have transformed machine learning through large-scale pretraining and in-creased test-time compute. Despite surpassing human performance in several domains, these models remain fundamentally limited in contin-uous operation, experience accumulation, and personalization, capabilities that are central to adaptive intelligence. While continual learning research has long targeted these goals, its his-torical focus on in-weight learning, i.e. , updat-ing a single model’s parameters to absorb new knowledge, has rendered catastrophic forgetting a persistent challenge. Our position is that combining the strengths of In-Weight Learn-ing (IWL) and the newly emerged capabil-ities of In-Context Learning (ICL) through the design of modular memory is the miss-ing piece for continual adaptation at scale. 

We outline a conceptual framework for modular memory-centric architectures that leverage ICL for rapid adaptation and knowledge accumula-tion, and IWL for stable updates to model capa-bilities, charting a practical roadmap toward con-tinually learning agents. This work stems from discussions held at the Dagstuhl seminar on Con-tinual Learning in the Era of Foundation Models (October 2025) .

> 1

Toyota Motor Europe 2University of Bremen 3University of Florence 4Microsoft Research 5Universit` a di Pisa 6HEC Montreal, Mila–Quebec AI Institute, Canada CIFAR AI Chair 

> 7

Bielefeld University 8Georgia Institute of Technology 9KU Leu-ven 10 University of Rochester 11 University of Texas at San Anto-nio 12 Nankai University 13 LUISS University 14 Stony Brook Uni-versity 15 University of T¨ ubingen 16 University of Trento, FBK 

> 17

University of Groningen 18 Tsinghua University 19 Computer Vi-sion Center Barcelona 20 Seoul National University. Correspon-dence to: Vaggelis Dorovatas <vdorovatas@hotmail.gr >, Rahaf Aljundi <rahaf.aljundi@gmail.com >.

> ∗VD and MS are first and second authors; JC and MM are last authors, with RA as last lead author. The remaining authors are ranked alphabetically.

# 1. Introduction 

Intelligence is often defined as the “ability to adapt to change” (Strauss, 2018), a perspective rooted in early work in psychology and neuroscience emphasizing adaptation, learning, and memory (Binet et al., 1905; Hebb, 1949), a view that remains echoed across a collection of modern definitions (Legg & Hutter, 2007). These principles under-pin continual and lifelong learning, which study how agents adapt to new tasks while balancing stability and plastic-ity (Hadsell et al., 2020). Continual learning (CL) research has long studied the problem of accumulating knowledge over the lifespan of a model in an aim to bridge training-and test-time learning (Wang et al., 2024a; Verwimp et al., 2024), typically through parametric learning, referred to hereafter as In-Weight Learning (IWL), of a monolithic model. Despite the strong advancements, frequent para-metric updates are challenged by forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; French, 1999), optimization instability (Had-sell et al., 2020; Hess et al., 2024), and reduced plastic-ity (Dohare et al., 2024), rendering CL one of the most challenging machine learning problems. In parallel, large-scale pretraining has dramatically ex-tended model capabilities. While domain-specific adap-tation was once viewed as essential (Wiggins & Tejani, 2022), foundation models now excel across a wide range of tasks and it becomes harder to identify entirely novel tasks. However, with the widespread adoption of AI agents (Luo et al., 2025) across a variety of scenarios, there is a growing need for such agents to operate continuously over extended periods of time. In doing so, they must accumulate knowl-edge and user interactions while maintaining an efficient computational footprint, underscoring the need for contin-ual adaptation and accumulation of experience. With advancing model capabilities, In-Context Learning (ICL) (Garg et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2024) emerged as an alternative learning mechanism to the traditional IWL paradigm. ICL modulates model outputs by incorporat-ing additional information, either raw inputs, retrieved or learned embeddings, via attention mechanisms (Vaswani 1

> arXiv:2603.01761v1 [cs.LG] 2 Mar 2026 Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents

et al., 2017). Recent studies suggest that ICL serves as a complementary learning mechanism (Lampinen et al., 2025; Dherin et al., 2025; Schuurmans, 2023), offering ad-vantages over IWL in few shot generalization and poten-tially more effective incorporation of implicit patterns (Yin et al., 2024). Thus, most efforts on adapting LLM agents focus on extending context windows and build memory systems for storing interaction histories (Gao et al., 2026), typically assuming a frozen model. While this initially appears to overcome the need to defy forgetting, relying solely on ICL for adaptation faces significant limitations: over-reliance on large contexts leads to computational in-efficiency with performance degradations as context length grows (Hong et al., 2025), while a frozen base model can-not adapt to fundamental shifts in data distributions or evolving user needs in non-stationary environments. Here, we argue that the key to intelligent adaptation and knowledge accumulation lies in combining the strengths of the two learning mechanisms, ICL and IWL, under a mod-ular memory architecture in which a pretrained core model is augmented with distinct memory modules: a working memory for active context and a long-term memory for rapid adaptation and knowledge accumulation. Rather than freezing the core model, long-term memory can be dis-tilled through stable, low-frequency updates (counteracting forgetting), not to induce pure memorization in the core model but to enable higher-level generalization from ac-cumulated knowledge and gradual performance improve-ment. Our position is that adaptation has long been the missing cornerstone on the path toward intelli-gence. Now is the right time to unlock modular con-tinual learning solutions that combine the complemen-tary strengths of In-Context Learning and In-Weight Learning. We outline the role of memory in related fields (Sec. 2), present our modular framework and its function-ality (Sec. 3, Sec. 4) then call for action, discussing oppor-tunities and application domains (Sec. 5). 

# 2. Memory across Soft-, Hard- & Wetware 

Memory is essential across various adjacent fields owing not only to its high relevance for consolidation of experi-ences, but also for adaptive compute. In the following, we briefly summarize complementary perspectives and high-light their relevance for continual learning agents at scale. 

2.1. Early Use of Memory in Continual Learning 

Memory has long been viewed as central to a ma-chine learning system’s ability to acquire new knowl-edge without erasing what was previously learned. Be-fore the rise of deep learning, influential lifelong learn-ing systems—such as the Never-Ending Language Learner (NELL) (Mitchell et al., 2018) and the Never-Ending Im-age Learner (NEIL) (Chen et al., 2013)—explicitly treated memory as a persistent repository accumulated over years of continuous operation, built from engineered components including web-scale extraction, coupled-pattern learning, morphological classification, and rule-based integration. With the resurgence of neural networks, continual learning re-emerged around the challenge of catastrophic interfer-ence (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; French, 1999). This shift led to a largely unified view of memory in deep continual learning, which can be broadly categorized into two forms: stored data and model parameters (De Lange et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2024a). First, rehearsal (or replay) of stored examples from past tasks became the dominant strategy for mitigating forgetting due to its empirical success (Rebuffi et al., 2017; Rolnick et al., 2019; Hayes et al., 2019; 2021; Verwimp et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022a). Second, mem-ory encoded in model parameters motivated approaches that constrain updates through parametric or functional reg-ularization (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2018; Li & Hoiem, 2017) or approximate replay via historical gradi-ents (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018; Aljundi et al., 2019b). Pseudo-rehearsal methods further synthesize past data using older model snapshots (Shin et al., 2017; van de Ven et al., 2020). Overall, memory in deep continual learning has been largely treated as a buffer with the primary role of mitigating forgetting during model training , rather than as an integral component of inference. While strong progress has been made, such sole reliance on In-Weight Learning is still largely challenged by forgetting and stability plasticity trade-offs. 

2.2. Memory in Modern Large-scale Models 

Current approaches to external memory in foundation mod-els range from using the context window as working mem-ory (Liu et al., 2022; Lewis et al., 2020) to agents with active memory management (Gao et al., 2026). They can be broadly classified into slot-based and distributed neu-ral memories (see Sec. 4.1). Slot-based memories can be raw data or latent embeddings. Raw data can be viewed as libraries for future tasks, like human-interpretable code (Wang et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2025b) and text snip-pets (Suzgun et al., 2025b; Ouyang et al., 2025b). These libraries can be structured (Edge et al., 2024), curated (Suz-gun et al., 2025b), generated by the model (Yu et al., 2025; Zhong et al., 2023), or exist as external knowledge bases (Lewis et al., 2020). Slot-based embedding memories can take the form of soft prompts (Zhang et al., 2025a), ex-tracted activations (Wang et al., 2024b), compressed KV vectors (Chen et al., 2025), or learned KV vectors (Zhang et al., 2025a; Caccia et al., 2025; Eyuboglu et al., 2025). In contrast, distributed neural memories are trained to gen-erate contextual input to the main model (Behrouz et al., 2025b; He et al., 2024). 2Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

A common characteristic of these approaches is that adap-tation is achieved almost exclusively through external memory and ICL, with the core model kept frozen. How-ever, in slot-based methods this could lead to unbounded memory growth or aggressive compression that risks dis-carding critical information, while in neural distributed ap-proaches, where memory is an external and continually up-dated neural module, this effectively shifts catastrophic for-getting to a different component of the system. A final line of work is similar to traditional CL literature focusing on continually updating (parts of) the core model. This is done either via test-time training (Sun et al., 2024; Tandon et al., 2025) or by treating the core model as the system’s single memory, targeting modularity and spar-sity (Behrouz et al., 2025a; Lin et al., 2025a). However, they are again prone to catastrophic forgetting. A natural fusion of memory perspectives towards its diverse roles re-mains largely open for continual learning agents at scale. 

2.3. Memory in Humans and Computers Human memory is distributed across interacting sys-tems operating at distinct timescales, capacities, and learn-ing mechanisms, enabling rapid acquisition without catas-trophic interference. The brain’s memory stack demon-strates that continual learning can be both fast and stable, providing a possible frame of reference in favor of a mod-ular architecture rather than a single store. Specifically, it consists of (i) sensory memory (very short-lived modal-ity buffers), (ii) working memory and (iii) long-term mem-ory , which is further split into declarative (concepts, facts, events) and nondeclarative (skills, habits, priming) (Squire, 2004). A central organizing principle, alongside mod-ularity, is complementarity : fast-learning systems such as the hippocampus encode pattern-separated, multimodal 

episodic representations, while slower cortical systems gradually acquire structured, generalizable knowledge in semantic long-term memory (McClelland et al., 1995). Co-ordination between these modules is mediated by selective, temporally structured replay (Hayes et al., 2021)—often during sleep—which supports consolidation across multi-ple timescales and enables stable learning with selective and graceful forgetting (Rasch & Born, 2013; Stickgold, 2005). Crucially, memory access is actively gated and dif-ferent modules employ distinct representational formats. 

Computer architecture treats memory as a first-class de-sign constraint, where capacity is finite, access is non-uniform, and performance is dominated by data move-ment rather than compute. Modern systems mitigate finite resources by organizing memory into a hierarchy (regis-ters, multi-level caches, DRAM, secondary storage) and by attaching explicit policies to movement across tiers: (i) write policies (e.g. , write-back to avoid unnecessary main-memory writes), (ii) replacement/eviction policies 

(e.g. , LRU/LFU approximations), (iii) prefetching (ex-ploiting locality), and (iv) telemetry (misses, page faults) that makes resource exhaustion observable and actionable (Hennessy & Patterson, 2024). Critically, the success of these systems depends on persistent memory with explicit management . Memory reliability emerges because finite capacity is acknowledged and controlled, not implicitly overloaded. This view has recently been related to how continual adaptation places demands on memory organiza-tion and past experience reuse towards the design of con-tinual accelerators (Kudithipudi et al., 2023). 

Implications for Continual Learning Agents. Modu-larity, multiple timescales, and active memory manage-ment jointly define key desiderata. Drawing inspiration from human memory and computer architecture, several guidelines emerge: 1. Separate fast adaptation from slow integration: rapid, context-specific retrieval supports im-mediate behavior, while consolidation enables stable up-dates (Hayes et al., 2021). 2. Leverage multiple rep-resentational forms spanning episodes, abstractions, and skills (Squire, 2004; Tulving et al., 1972). 3. Differenti-ate declarative (facts, events) and non-declarative (skills) memory (Squire, 2004). 4. Treat memory as an actively managed resource: systems need policies for storage, re-play, forgetting, consolidation, and contextualization (Du-dai, 2004). Together, these elements remain underexplored in developing continual learning agents. 

# 3. A Modular Memory Framework for Continual Learning Agents 

Modular continual learning architectures have been con-ceptualized before (McClelland et al., 1995; Mitchell et al., 2018), but practical instantiations remained notoriously challenging. We posit that advances in foundation mod-els now make their vision feasible. Specifically, the emer-gence of ICL as an effective learning mechanism (Yin et al., 2024; Lampinen et al., 2025) and the increasing ability of large models to reason with external knowledge (Luo et al., 2025) open the door to a new era of modular con-tinual learning. Crucially, several recent positions have highlighted elements, such as episodic memory (Pink et al., 2025), metacognitive control (Liu & van der Schaar, 2025), and cognitive architectures for language agents (Sumers et al., 2023). We view these as components of our mod-ular framework, unifying them into a coherent system for multimodal agents capable of continual learning. 

3.1. Main System Components 

We describe the different roles of the individual compo-nents in our proposed framework, as outlined in Figure 1. 3Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents   

> Figure 1. An illustration of the role of memory in unlocking continual learning through the construction of distinct modules. The framework comprises (1) a core model for perception and reasoning, (2) a working memory module for temporarily storing information relevant to the current interaction round, and (3) a long-term memory module that accumulates extracted experiences, facts, and obser-vations. Knowledge stored in long-term memory is selectively retrieved into working memory and consolidated into the core model, steadily improving its capabilities.

The core model encodes general-purpose knowledge and skills that define the system’s core capabilities. These ca-pabilities are acquired during pretraining and are refined through consolidation after experience and knowledge ac-cumulation. The core model can operate independently of long-term memory and provides fundamental capabilities such as perception, reasoning, multimodal understanding, action selection and generation, and tool use. 

The working memory determines the current state of the system and serves to condition the main model on both the current environmental state and internal state. It may include both external signals, such as user instructions, demonstrations, or sensory inputs, and internal signals, such as retrieved long-term memories, intermediate reason-ing traces, or latent planning states. Working memory is transient and limited in capacity. 

The long-term memory stores information that persists beyond the current context, including facts, events, and per-sonalized experiences (akin to declarative human memory, see 2.3). It is instrumental for rapid adaptation and accu-mulation of knowledge, reflection on captured experience and hence continual performance improvement. Long-term memory supports mechanisms for retrieval, updating, for-getting, and consolidation. 

The external world represents the agent’s own environ-ment including accessible tools and other agents, which can be queried for auxiliary information and operations. 

3.2. System Operation 

The system operates in two regimes: an external interaction regime and an internal consolidation regime. In the external regime (environment-driven), the system responds to signals originating from the environment. In-coming signals are encoded into the working memory, which conditions the core model. During inference, con-trol mechanisms regulate the response process by implic-itly determining a processing strategy, including whether retrieval from long-term memory is required and how much computational effort should be allocated to the current in-put ( e.g. test-time scaling). When long-term memory is engaged, relevant past experiences or knowledge are re-trieved into working memory to ground subsequent reason-ing. Once the internal reasoning process completes, the system generates an appropriate response or action directed to the environment. The system also determines how this interaction (along with potential feedback from the envi-ronment) should be incorporated in the long-term memory. In the internal regime (self-driven), the system focuses on consolidation and long-term memory refinement in the ab-sence of external stimuli. During this phase, which oc-curs sparsely after accumulating sufficient experience, the model reprocesses and replays stored long-term memories to distill useful information into the core model, thereby re-fining existing capabilities and acquiring new skills. Con-solidation improves efficiency by reducing reliance on ex-plicit memory retrieval during future interactions. Con-currently, long-term memory itself undergoes refinement, compression and graceful forgetting, and the system re-4Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

organizes memories to better expose generalizable struc-tures—simultaneously freeing capacity and enhancing the memory’s ability to support future learning. 

Controlling the Flow. As outlined, decisions about the system’s operation require control policies. These may be specified via architect-designed heuristics or learned by the model. While intrinsic meta-cognitive learning is essential for autonomous continual learning systems, it remains an orthogonal research problem (Liu & van der Schaar, 2025). In Section 4.2 we discuss potential approaches and direc-tions for both memory operations and control. 

Multiple Learning Mechanisms. Our proposed mem-ory framework supports learning with distinct mecha-nisms. Long-term and working memory enable fast learn-ing through In-Context Learning. With ICL we do not ex-plicitly refer here to using external raw data as additional input to the model, but rather to the attention mechanism that modulates the output of each layer based on addi-tional embeddings capturing previous experiences, demon-strations, or task-specific information. In a round of in-teraction, relevant extracted information can be stored in the long-term memory, which can be retrieved in future interactions to immediately condition the core model, en-abling few-shot adaptation and performance improvements without modifying the core model parameters. In con-trast, the core model itself is updated more sparsely via In-Weight Learning, driven by consolidation during the inter-nal regime. Consolidation distills information from long-term memory into the model’s parameters, gradually im-proving its core capabilities and overall system’s efficiency. 

# 4. Designing a Modular Memory 

We now discuss how to design memory modules across two primary design dimensions: (1) memory representa-tions, i.e., how individual memory items are encoded, and (2) memory organization and functions, i.e., how items are stored or retrieved and how memory is updated or consol-idated. We focus on the rationale behind key choices and their implications with respect to desirable properties and design trade-offs. While no single design is universally fitting, we hope future research will target better memory structures and mechanisms. For a survey of existing mem-ory design approaches, we refer to Hu et al. (2025). 

4.1. Memory Representations 

We start by describing the different memory representa-tions and their attributes. 

(a) Slot-based memories. They allocate discrete storage for each distinct memory (item 1), ensuring independent ac-cessibility. They consist of:  

> 1E.g. , a reasoning trace, a fact, or a tool description.

(i) Raw Data. Interactions, reasoning or input data would be stored in their original format. For example, text queries and responses for LLMs (Brown et al., 2020) or vi-sual demonstrations with textual instructions for VLMs. 

(ii) Embeddings. This format embeds raw data into a learned latent space, often compressing information or op-timizing for specific functions like retrieval (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). Three current main directions can be identified based on the representational space used: (1) 

Activation-based where hidden activations are extracted from the core model layer(s) when processing an input (Wang et al., 2024b); (2) Key-Value caching where atten-tion layers’ keys and values (Di et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025) are used as memory representations, eliminating pro-jection costs during retrieval (compared to (1)) but at the expense of doubled storage (key and value vectors must be stored); and (3) Learned embeddings where an additional learned transformation ( e.g. , external encoders (Tack et al., 2024)) maps inputs into a specialized embedding space. Memory embeddings can also be optimized as learnable compressed vectors to the core model layers ( e.g. , prefix tuning (Li & Liang, 2021), prompt tuning (Lester et al., 2021), slot attention (Locatello et al., 2020; Marconato et al., 2023)). 

(b) Distributed neural memories encode information across shared network parameters, with no discrete bound-aries between items. The defining characteristic is cross-item interference : multiple items modify overlapping weights, making it non-trivial to localize individual mem-ories. Retrieval is performed implicitly through the net-work’s forward pass. 2 An intuitive categorization of neural memory approaches is based on the model’s update rule: 1) Slow gradient-based updates in deep networks per-form updates iteratively using backpropagation over deep model layers ( e.g. , Behrouz et al. (2025b)), while 2) Fast associative updates perform fast, often one-shot memory updates e.g. , Camelot (He et al., 2024), which implement extensions of the simple outer-product associative memory, storing memories outside the main model using associative rules. For a more detailed and theoretically grounded dis-cussion we refer to Irie & Gershman (2026). 

Characteristics that a memory structure should satisfy can now be defined, and the previously discussed representa-tions can be evaluated against the desiderata in Table 1: • Per-Item Storage Efficiency describes how compactly information is stored, ranging from verbatim storage in raw data to parameter-sharing in distributed memories. • Memory Capacity refers to how storage requirements 

> 2While methods like prefix tuning optimize embeddings di-rectly, we categorize them as slot based rather than neural since each item’s parameters are independent, differently from group-ing all parameter-based storage together as in Hu et al. (2025).

5Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents                         

> Memory Type Per-item Storage Capacity Modality Update Speed Interference Risk Selective Forgetting Retrieval Generalization Slot-based Memory
> ,→Raw Data (summaries, exemplars, coresets) Low Unbounded Uni-modal Fast Low Easy Grows with #items Limited
> ,→Embeddings (KV cache, activations, learned) Medium Unbounded Uni/ Multi-modal Fast Low Easy Grows with #items Implicit (learned encodings)
> Neural Memory (e.g. ,DNNs, Hopfield, SDM) High Bounded Uni/ Multi-modal Slow/ Fast High Difficult Depends on network size Explicit (shared params)

Table 1. Desiderata and assessment of current memory representations (as defined in Sec. 4.1). Storage is more compact for neural memory while Capacity is unbounded for slot-based, raw data is typically unimodal, update speed is varied based on specific design choices, interference is high in neural memory, selective forgetting is easier for slot based. Finally generalization is poor in raw-data, implicitly encoded in embeddings, while explicitly optimized in neural memory. 

scale with the number of items stored. Slot-based meth-ods have unbounded capacity that grows with the number of items, whereas distributed memories’ capacity is typi-cally bounded by the network size and architecture. • Modality indicates whether individual item representa-tions are unimodal ( e.g. , a single image or text) or can encode multimodal information. Raw data are naturally constrained to unimodal item representations. • Update Speed measures how quickly new items can be robustly incorporated into memory. Slot-based methods support fast updates via direct slot addition. For neural methods, update speed depends on the update rule. • Selective Forgetting indicates the ease of removing spe-cific items from memory without interference. Slot-based methods enable easy instance-level deletion by re-moving individual slots. Distributed memories hinder selective forgetting because entangled shared parameters make removing one item risk harming others. • Retrieval characterizes the cost of finding items given a query. In slot-based memories, retrieval cost grows with the number of stored items and depends on the under-lying data structure ( e.g. , linear for lists, logarithmic for trees), whereas in distributed memories it is constant with respect to item count and depends on network size. • Model transferability refers to whether memory repre-sentations can be reused across agents with different core models ( e.g. , experience sharing in multi-agent systems). This is easy for raw data (modulo privacy constraints) but challenging for model-specific representations: for instance, KV caches are not directly interpretable by other agents, although recent work shows sharing is pos-sible among agents with the same LLM (Ye et al., 2025). For neural memories, model merging or alignment tech-niques provide potential mechanisms (Yang et al., 2024). • Generalization is a key property of memory, referring to its ability to support reasoning across related scenarios by enabling efficient retrieval and updating of relevant past experiences for new inputs. Raw data memories offer limited generalization, whereas learned and neural repre-sentations can abstract and reuse experience more effec-tively. For instance, Chen et al. (2025) show that storing reasoning traces as KV caches yields better experience reuse on related problems than context summarization. 

Discussion. Memory representations trade off fidelity, ef-ficiency, and generalization. Raw data preserves complete information and is model agnostic, but requires high stor-age, incurs costly retrieval that often necessitates embed-ding for similarity based search, and does not directly gen-eralize across scenarios. Latent embeddings compress in-formation for efficient similarity based access and encode relational structure that supports generalization, but are lossy and architecture specific. Neural memories provide high storage efficiency, efficient retrieval, and strong gener-alization, but suffer from interference leading to forgetting along with poor support for selective removal. 

4.2. Memory Structure and Functions 

Memory organization ranges from flat lists, which rep-resent memories as temporal sequences (Lewis et al., 2020), to hierarchical structures that organize mem-ories into layers of abstraction such as trees (Sarthi et al., 2024), and graph-based structures that explicitly encode relations among items, enabling richer seman-tic access (Jimenez Gutierrez et al., 2024). Memory should be structured to support efficient and effective retrieval, updates, and selective forgetting. Our aim is not to advocate for a specific structure, but to articulate desired functional properties that can guide future research. 

When and What to Add. Memory updates operate across multiple timescales in our modular memory system. Working memory is highly transient, retaining information only within a task or context, while long-term memory evolves more slowly as information is transferred from working memory via capacity-based or event-driven updates. At the slowest timescale, the base model is updated only after substantial experience accumulation 6Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

during consolidation phases, yielding less frequent updates thereby naturally reducing exposure to interference. Update decisions can cascade across memory modules :committing items to long-term memory clears working memory, while absorbing long-term memories into model parameters enables episodic traces to be compressed or eventually evicted. Update policies may be governed by 

designer-specified heuristics (e.g. , capacity thresholds, periodic consolidation & event-driven signals (Suzgun et al., 2025a)) or by learned policies (Nawrot et al., 2024). Key challenges include objective design, long-horizon credit assignment, and policy adaptation. Determining what to store in neural memory has been extensively studied in continual learning (e.g. coresets (Bl¨ omer et al., 2016; Har-Peled & Kushal, 2005) and heuristic selection (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; Killamsetty et al., 2021; Paul et al., 2025)), and recently in LLMs ( e.g. ,context summarization (Yu et al., 2025; Anthropic, 2025) and KV-cache selection (Devoto et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023), yet the question remains open. 

When and What to Forget. These questions are long-standing challenges in the CL literature related to limited model capacity and constrained computational resources (Aljundi et al., 2018). Forgetting occurs either when capacity limits are reached or according to periodic schedules. It can take the form of eviction or compression 

(e.g. , merging, summarization). Beyond constraints, forgetting may be also deliberately induced to address outdated, conflicting, or ethically sensitive information (e.g. , Hegde et al. (2025); Qi et al. (2023); Guan et al. (2025)). Temporal policies (e.g. , FIFO queues) (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017) evict or compress items based solely on recency, offering simplicity but risking the loss of valu-able long-term information, whereas importance-based heuristics (Zhang et al., 2023; Dorovatas et al., 2025) score items using signals such as retrieval frequency or cumulative attention. In contrast, learned policies (Bui et al., 2025; Ła´ ncucki et al., 2025) optimize forgetting by predicting future utility under memory constraints, for example via objectives that jointly penalize task loss and memory size, encouraging sparse selective retention. 

When and How to Retrieve. The simplest strategy retrieves on every input, maximizing information avail-ability while incurring retrieval overhead and potential noise injection. More selective approaches trigger re-trieval based on internal model signals such as uncer-tainty (Chen et al., 2026), or via learned retrieval deci-sions in which the model explicitly generates a retrieval re-quest (Wang et al., 2023b). In contrast, how to retrieve is constrained by the memory representation. In neural mem-ories, retrieval is implicit and learned as part of the for-ward pass, whereas slot-based memories require explicit retrieval mechanisms. Similarity-based retrieval is the dominant paradigm (Lewis et al., 2020), including online and rehearsal-based methods ( e.g. , (Aljundi et al., 2019a; Shim et al., 2021)). On the other hand, frequency-based 

retrieval maintains access counts and prioritizes frequently used items (Lin et al., 2025b). 

Core model consolidation aims to update the pretrained model, already equipped with strong perception and rea-soning capabilities, by leveraging experience accumulated in the long-term memory. Rather than promoting shal-low memorization, such distillation is envisioned to re-fine the model’s capabilities and internalize new skills, en-abling higher-level generalization, adaptation to distribu-tion shifts, and improved overall performance. Updates to the core model rely on IWL. Thus, effective consolidation depends on appropriate IWL policies over stored experi-ences. Recent work has investigated how new knowledge is acquired and consolidated (Dohare et al., 2024; Shah et al., 2025), proposing training recipes that promote generaliza-tion (Eyuboglu et al., 2025; Padmanabhan et al., 2023) and analyzing the generalization/memorization trade-offs (Chu et al., 2025). Consolidation should be further integrated with mechanisms to preserve prior knowledge and mitigate forgetting, for which continual learning approaches such as regularization and replay can be adopted. Importantly, because in our proposed framework, parametric consolida-tion into the core model occurs relatively infrequently and with the aid of a long-term memory, the risks associated with continual IWL—e.g., forgetting, optimization insta-bility and loss of plasticity—are naturally reduced. How-ever, as these risks are not fully removed, further research on continual IWL remains important. 

# 5. Challenges and Opportunities 

We outline a call to action to address emerging opportuni-ties and challenges across key application domains. 

5.1. Opportunities for Memory-Centric Agents 

• Faster Adaptation & Efficiency. Maintaining long-term memories facilitates efficient learning of new knowledge by leveraging similarities between novel and past experiences. Drawing on previously encountered, related scenarios enables faster problem solving and re-duces the need for explicit deliberation (Wu et al., 2025). • Hallucination Reduction & Alignment. Explicit mem-ory supports grounded responses by requiring models to reference factual memories as a form of “certificate of understanding,” thereby reducing hallucinations (Kollias et al., 2024). When hallucinations occur, user corrections can be stored to calibrate the model’s future outputs. • Explainability. Requiring models to reference memories 7Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

when producing outputs improves explainability e.g. , by enabling explicit descriptions of prototypical cases (Ry-marczyk et al., 2023). These grounded memories help explain model successes and failures, clarifying why aparticular output was produced. • Personalization. Memory management and retrieval enables personalization (Chen et al., 2024) of assistive agents to users’ needs and preferences. A user’s require-ments vary over time, and graceful forgetting can enable access to the most up-to-date knowledge. • World Modeling & Future Prediction. Explicit long-term memory complements world modeling, viewed as a milestone in embodied intelligence that enables agents to predict future states and act accordingly (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; LeCun, 2022; Sekar et al., 2020), by grounding predictions in an agent’s experience. Here, de-viations between predicted and observed outcomes pro-vide a learning signal and memory can capture agent-specific dynamics shaped by past interactions, rather than approximating the full environment distribution. 

5.2. Challenging Application Domains 

In Continual Learning of Tasks, Test-Time Adaptation ,models face domain shifts and are updated online after de-ployment, making optimal parameters context-dependent (Wang et al., 2022b). However, existing methods (Liang et al., 2025) rely on data augmentation, self-supervised ob-jectives, or stochastic weight resets, leaving contextual and domain-aware memory management largely unexplored. In Open-Ended and Open-World Learning , models en-counter new tasks ( e.g. , new concepts in the context of clas-sification) both at train and test time (Bendale & Boult, 2015; Mundt et al., 2023). Domain-aware memory with ICL makes it natural to transcend predefined label spaces. In Tool Learning , agents benefit from accumulating and reusing knowledge about tool interfaces, compositions, and effective usage over time. Whereas static models can or-chestrate tools (Shen et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2023), aug-menting them with memory enables continual improve-ment in tool usage as the ecosystem evolves. Rather than relearning affordances, memory allows agents to store suc-cessful tool-use traces and learn what to offload externally. In Capturing of Reasoning and Experience , test-time scaling (Snell et al., 2025) has shown strong gains on chal-lenging tasks by increasing test-time compute and enabling models to generate longer reasoning traces. However, these traces are typically discarded after each interaction, forc-ing repeated recomputation for similar reasoning. A CL agent equipped with modular memory can reuse past rea-soning traces, enabling increased efficiency in inference and performance improvement as experience accumulates over time (Ouyang et al., 2025a; Chen et al., 2025). In Streaming Scenarios , the sequential, long-horizon, and resource-constrained nature poses canonical CL chal-lenges, e.g., video understanding. Recent work increas-ingly emphasizes explicit memory mechanisms to retain, retrieve, and reason over long temporal contexts in online settings (Kang et al., 2024; Xiong et al., 2025; Dorovatas et al., 2025; Xiong et al., 2025), highlighting the relevance of our modular memory framework for these challenges. In Embodied Agents , monolithic neural networks often lead to struggles with long-horizon action rollouts, as they must retain knowledge of past observations and actions to generate contextually appropriate behavior. Scene graphs have been proposed as pre-established memories that cap-ture object relations under full observability (Mohammadi et al., 2025; Honerkamp et al., 2024). However, real-world environments are observed incrementally and evolve over time. Recent work therefore treats learnable memory as a task objective (Gupta et al., 2025). A continual-learning agent with explicit memory can recall object relations for planning and update them as the environment changes. 

# 6. Alternative Views 

Infinite Context & Long Context + RAG. An alternative view might argue that extending context windows to in-clude past information is sufficient, either by architectural advances or retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020). While the conceptual ease may be appeal-ing, this paradigm faces several limitations. First, process-ing extended contexts remains computationally expensive, with inference costs increasing as context length grows, despite recent advances in long-context architectures (Co-manici et al., 2025). Additionally, long-context reason-ing performance degrades as context grows and can unpre-dictably alter model behavior (Liu et al., 2024; Du et al., 2025; Geng et al., 2025). Additionally, RAG is sensitive to surface-level linguistic variation (Cao et al., 2025) and is susceptible to noise due to its static nature and the absence of mechanisms for selective forgetting. Finally, storage re-quirements are exacerbated in multi-modal and embodied settings, where storing and retrieving raw sensory experi-ences is prohibitively expensive. 

Continual Parametric Updates. Another perspective could posit that continually updating the core model, which lies at the heart of traditional CL approaches ((section 2.1)) and underpins the recent test-time training paradigm (Sun et al., 2020), is sufficient to absorb new knowledge. Whereas efficient techniques exist for sparse updates (Han et al., 2024), this strategy is costly at scale, requires careful per-update hyperparameter tuning, and is prone to catas-trophic forgetting. Even when using isolated modules 8Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

such as LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2022), merging up-dates remains challenging, and low-rank updates can ex-acerbate forgetting (Shuttleworth et al., 2024). As empha-sized throughout this paper, updating models through IWL remains very challenging, which makes solely relying on continual parametric updates problematic. 

# 7. Conclusion 

We argue that the future of adaptive AI needs to inte-grate the strengths of two learning paradigms via modu-lar memory: (a) in-context learning through complemen-tary working memory and long-term memory, and (b) in-weight learning through low-frequency parametric updates. Rather than choosing between them, we posit that a smooth knowledge transition pathway is necessary: experience first enters working memory for immediate adaptation, accumu-lates in long-term memory for selective retrieval and refine-ment, and is gradually consolidated into the model param-eters. We ground our framework in functional considera-tions for memory modules. As memory-centric and contin-uously updated models develop somewhat independently of established continual learning research, we call for re-alignment and assessment of their strengths, weaknesses, and synergies on the path toward continual learning agents. 

# References 

Aljundi, R., Babiloni, F., Elhoseiny, M., Rohrbach, M., and Tuytelaars, T. Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget. In Proceedings of the European confer-ence on computer vision (ECCV) , pp. 139–154, 2018. Aljundi, R., Belilovsky, E., Tuytelaars, T., Charlin, L., Cac-cia, M., Lin, M., and Page-Caccia, L. Online continual learning with maximal interfered retrieval. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019a. Aljundi, R., Lin, M., Goujaud, B., and Bengio, Y. Gradi-ent based sample selection for online continual learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 32, 2019b. Anthropic. Context editing, 2025. URL 

https://platform.claude.com/docs/ en/build-with-claude/context-editing .Anthropic Claude Developer Platform documentation. Behrouz, A., Razaviyayn, M., Zhong, P., and Mirrokni, V. Nested learning: The illusion of deep learning architec-tures. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025a. Behrouz, A., Zhong, P., and Mirrokni, V. Titans: Learning to memorize at test time. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,2025b. Bendale, A. and Boult, T. Towards open world recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition , pp. 1893–1902, 2015. Binet, A., Beaunis, H. E., Des Bancels, L., Simon, T., and Pi´ eron, H. L’ann´ ee psychologique . Presses universitaires de France, 1905. Bl¨ omer, J., Brauer, S., and Bujna, K. On coreset construc-tions for the fuzzy k-means problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.07516 , 2016. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sas-try, G., Askell, A., et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. Bui, N., Sharma, S., Lamba, S., Mishra, S., and Ying, R. Cache what lasts: Token retention for memory-bounded kv cache in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.03324 ,2025. Caccia, L., Ansell, A., Ponti, E., Vuli´ c, I., and Sordoni, A. Training plug-and-play knowledge modules with deep context distillation. In Second Conference on Language Modeling , 2025. Cao, T., Bhandari, N., Yerukola, A., Asai, A., and Sap, M. Out of style: Rag’s fragility to linguistic variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08231 , 2025. Chaudhry, A., Ranzato, M., Rohrbach, M., and Elhoseiny, M. Efficient lifelong learning with a-gem. In Proceed-ings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2018. Chen, J., Liu, Z., Huang, X., Wu, C., Liu, Q., Jiang, G., Pu, Y., Lei, Y., Chen, X., Wang, X., et al. When large language models meet personalization: Perspectives of challenges and opportunities. World Wide Web , 27(4): 42, 2024. Chen, P. B., Zhang, Y., Roth, D., Madden, S., Andreas, J., and Cafarella, M. Log-augmented generation: Scal-ing test-time reasoning with reusable computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14398 , 2025. Chen, W., Qi, G., Li, W., Li, Y., Xia, D., and Huang, J. Decide then retrieve: A training-free framework with uncertainty-guided triggering and dual-path retrieval. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03908 , 2026. Chen, X., Shrivastava, A., and Gupta, A. Neil: Extracting visual knowledge from web data. In Proceedings of the 

9Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 1409–1416, 2013. Chu, T., Zhai, Y., Yang, J., Tong, S., Xie, S., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q. V., Levine, S., and Ma, Y. SFT memorizes, RL generalizes: A comparative study of foundation model post-training. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Comanici, G., Bieber, E., Schaekermann, M., Pasupat, I., Sachdeva, N., Dhillon, I., Blistein, M., Ram, O., Zhang, D., Rosen, E., et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 , 2025. De Lange, M., Aljundi, R., Masana, M., Parisot, S., Jia, X., Leonardis, A., Slabaugh, G., and Tuytelaars, T. Acontinual learning survey: Defying forgetting in classifi-cation tasks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 44(7):3366–3385, 2021. Devoto, A., Zhao, Y., Scardapane, S., and Minervini, P. A simple and effective l 2 norm-based strategy for KV cache compression. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing , pp. 18476–18499. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics, 2024. Dherin, B., Munn, M., Mazzawi, H., Wunder, M., and Gonzalvo, J. Learning without training: The im-plicit dynamics of in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.16003 , 2025. Di, S., Yu, Z., Zhang, G., Li, H., TaoZhong, Cheng, H., Li, B., He, W., Shu, F., and Jiang, H. Streaming video question-answering with in-context video KV-cache re-trieval. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Dohare, S., Hernandez-Garcia, J. F., Lan, Q., Rahman, P., Mahmood, A. R., and Sutton, R. S. Loss of plasticity in deep continual learning. Nature , 632(8026):768–774, 2024. Dong, Q., Li, L., Dai, D., Zheng, C., Ma, J., Li, R., Xia, H., Xu, J., Wu, Z., Chang, B., et al. A survey on in-context learning. In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing ,pp. 1107–1128, 2024. Dorovatas, V., Seifi, S., Gupta, G., and Aljundi, R. Recur-rent attention-based token selection for efficient stream-ing video-llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17364 , 2025. Du, Y., Tian, M., Ronanki, S., Rongali, S., Bodapati, S. B., Galstyan, A., Wells, A., Schwartz, R., Huerta, E. A., and Peng, H. Context length alone hurts LLM performance despite perfect retrieval. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , 2025. Dudai, Y. The neurobiology of consolidations, or, how sta-ble is the engram? Annu. Rev. Psychol. , 55(1):51–86, 2004. Edge, D., Trinh, H., Cheng, N., Bradley, J., Chao, A., Mody, A., Truitt, S., Metropolitansky, D., Ness, R. O., and Larson, J. From local to global: A graph rag ap-proach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130 , 2024. Eyuboglu, S., Ehrlich, R., Arora, S., Guha, N., Zinsley, D., Liu, E., Tennien, W., Rudra, A., Zou, J., Mirhoseini, A., et al. Cartridges: Lightweight and general-purpose long context representations via self-study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06266 , 2025. French, R. M. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences , 3(4):128–135, 1999. Gao, H.-a., Geng, J., Hua, W., Hu, M., Juan, X., Liu, H., Liu, S., Qiu, J., Qi, X., Wu, Y., et al. A survey of self-evolving agents: On path to artificial super intelligence. 

Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2026. Garg, S., Tsipras, D., Liang, P. S., and Valiant, G. What can transformers learn in-context? a case study of simple function classes. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , 35:30583–30598, 2022. Geng, J., Chen, H., Liu, R., Ribeiro, M. H., Willer, R., Neubig, G., and Griffiths, T. L. Accumulating context changes the beliefs of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01805 , 2025. Guan, Z., Hu, M., Zhu, R., Li, S., and Vullikanti, A. Benign samples matter! fine-tuning on outlier benign samples severely breaks safety, 2025. Gupta, G., Yadav, K., Kira, Z., Gal, Y., and Aljundi, R. Memo: Training memory-efficient embodied agents with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19732 , 2025. Ha, D. and Schmidhuber, J. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2(3), 2018. Hadsell, R., Rao, D., Rusu, A. A., and Pascanu, R. Embrac-ing change: Continual learning in deep neural networks. 

Trends in cognitive sciences , 24(12):1028–1040, 2020. Han, Z., Gao, C., Liu, J., Zhang, J., and Zhang, S. Q. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning for large models: A com-prehensive survey. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. 10 Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

Har-Peled, S. and Kushal, A. Smaller coresets for k-median and k-means clustering. Proceedings of the twenty-first annual symposium on Computational geometry , pp. 126–134, 2005. Hayes, T. L., Cahill, N. D., and Kanan, C. Memory effi-cient experience replay for streaming learning. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 9769–9776. IEEE, 2019. Hayes, T. L., Krishnan, G. P., Bazhenov, M., Siegelmann, H. T., Sejnowski, T. J., and Kanan, C. Replay in deep learning: Current approaches and missing biological el-ements. Neural Computation , 33(11):2908–2950, 2021. He, Z., Karlinsky, L., Kim, D., McAuley, J., Krotov, D., and Feris, R. Camelot: Towards large language mod-els with training-free consolidated associative memory. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13449 , 2024. Hebb, D. O. The organization of behavior; a neuropsycho-logical theory. Wiley, 1949. Hegde, N., Paul, S., Joel-Frey, L., Brack, M., Kersting, K., Mundt, M., and Schramowski, P. Chronoberg: Captur-ing language evolution and temporal awareness in foun-dation models. arXiv 2509.22360 , 2025. Hennessy, J. L. and Patterson, D. A. Computer Architec-ture: A Quantitative Approach . Morgan Kaufmann, 7 edition, 2024. Hess, T., Tuytelaars, T., and van de Ven, G. M. Two com-plementary perspectives to continual learning: Ask not only what to optimize, but also how. In Proceedings of the 1st ContinualAI Unconference, 2023 , volume 249 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 37–61. PMLR, 2024. Honerkamp, D., B¨ uchner, M., Despinoy, F., Welschehold, T., and Valada, A. Language-grounded dynamic scene graphs for interactive object search with mobile manip-ulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. Hong, K., Troynikov, A., and Huber, J. Context rot: How increasing input tokens impacts llm performance. URL https://research. trychroma. com/context-rot, retrieved October , 20:2025, 2025. Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W., et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR , 1(2):3, 2022. Hu, Y., Liu, S., Yue, Y., Zhang, G., Liu, B., Zhu, F., Lin, J., Guo, H., Dou, S., Xi, Z., et al. Memory in the age of ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564 , 2025. Irie, K. and Gershman, S. J. Fast weight programming and linear transformers: from machine learning to neurobiol-ogy. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2026. Jimenez Gutierrez, B., Shu, Y., Gu, Y., Yasunaga, M., and Su, Y. Hipporag: Neurobiologically inspired long-term memory for large language models. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 37:59532–59569, 2024. Kang, H., Yoon, J., Kim, D., Hwang, S. J., and Yoo, C. D. Progressive fourier neural representation for sequential video compilation. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2024. Killamsetty, K., Durga, S., Ramakrishnan, G., De, A., and Iyer, R. Grad-match: Gradient matching based data sub-set selection for efficient deep model training. Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 5464–5474, 2021. Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J., Desjardins, G., Rusu, A. A., Milan, K., Quan, J., Ra-malho, T., Grabska-Barwinska, A., et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114(13):3521– 3526, 2017. Kollias, G., Das, P., and Chaudhury, S. Generation con-straint scaling can mitigate hallucination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16908 , 2024. Kudithipudi, D., Daram, A., Zyarah, A. M., Zohora, F. T., Aimone, J. B., Yanguas-Gil, A., Soures, N., Neftci, E., Mattina, M., Lomonaco, V., et al. Design principles for lifelong learning ai accelerators. Nature electronics , 6 (11):807–822, 2023. Lampinen, A. K., Chaudhry, A., Chan, S. C., Wild, C., Wan, D., Ku, A., Bornschein, J., Pascanu, R., Shanahan, M., and McClelland, J. L. On the generalization of lan-guage models from in-context learning and finetuning: a controlled study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.00661 ,2025. Ła´ ncucki, A., Staniszewski, K., Nawrot, P., and Ponti, E. Inference-time hyper-scaling with KV cache compres-sion. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. LeCun, Y. A path towards autonomous machine intelli-gence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27. Open Review , 62(1): 1–62, 2022. Legg, S. and Hutter, M. A collection of definitions of in-telligence. arXiv:0706.3639, tech report number IDSIA-07-07 , 2007. 11 Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

Lester, B., Al-Rfou, R., and Constant, N. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt tuning. In Proceed-ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 3045–3059, 2021. Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., K¨ uttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t., Rockt¨ aschel, T., et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459–9474, 2020. Li, X. L. and Liang, P. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continu-ous prompts for generation. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pp. 4582–4597, 2021. Li, Z. and Hoiem, D. Learning without forgetting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-gence , 40(12):2935–2947, 2017. Liang, J., He, R., and Tan, T. A comprehensive survey on test-time adaptation under distribution shifts. Interna-tional Journal of Computer Vision , 133(1):31–64, 2025. Lin, J., Zettlemoyer, L., Ghosh, G., Yih, W.-T., Markosyan, A., Berges, V.-P., and O˘ guz, B. Continual learn-ing via sparse memory finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15103 , 2025a. Lin, S., Peng, Z., Li, L., Lin, X., Zhu, X., and Zhang, Y. Cache mechanism for agent rag systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02919 , 2025b. Liu, J., Shen, D., Zhang, Y., Dolan, W. B., Carin, L., and Chen, W. What makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? In Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out (DeeLIO 2022): The 3rd workshop on knowledge extraction and integration for deep learning architectures , pp. 100–114, 2022. Liu, N. F., Lin, K., Hewitt, J., Paranjape, A., Bevilacqua, M., Petroni, F., and Liang, P. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173, 2024. Liu, T. and van der Schaar, M. Truly Self-Improving Agents Require Intrinsic Metacognitive Learning, June 2025. Locatello, F., Weissenborn, D., Unterthiner, T., Mahen-dran, A., Heigold, G., Uszkoreit, J., Dosovitskiy, A., and Kipf, T. Object-centric learning with slot atten-tion. In Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., and Lin, H. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 33, pp. 11525– 11538, 2020. Lopez-Paz, D. and Ranzato, M. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Luo, J., Zhang, W., Yuan, Y., Zhao, Y., Yang, J., Gu, Y., Wu, B., Chen, B., Qiao, Z., Long, Q., et al. Large lan-guage model agent: A survey on methodology, applica-tions and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21460 ,2025. Marconato, E., Bontempo, G., Ficarra, E., Calderara, S., Passerini, A., and Teso, S. Neuro-symbolic continual learning: knowledge, reasoning shortcuts and concept rehearsal. In Proceedings of the 40th International Con-ference on Machine Learning , 2023. McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., and O’Reilly, R. C. Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological review , 102(3):419, 1995. McCloskey, M. and Cohen, N. J. Catastrophic interfer-ence in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation , vol-ume 24, pp. 109–165. Elsevier, 1989. Mirzasoleiman, B., Bilmes, J., and Leskovec, J. Coresets for data-efficient training of machine learning models. 

arXiv , 2020. Mitchell, T., Cohen, W., Hruschka, E., Talukdar, P., Yang, B., Betteridge, J., Carlson, A., Dalvi, B., Gardner, M., Kisiel, B., et al. Never-ending learning. Communications of the ACM , 61(5):103–115, 2018. Mohammadi, M., Honerkamp, D., B¨ uchner, M., Cassinelli, M., Welschehold, T., Despinoy, F., Gilitschenski, I., and Valada, A. More: Mobile manipulation rearrangement through grounded language reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03035 , 2025. Mundt, M., Hong, Y., Pliushch, I., and Ramesh, V. Awholistic view of continual learning with deep neural networks: Forgotten lessons and the bridge to active and open world learning. Neural Networks , 160:306–336, 2023. Nawrot, P., Ła´ ncucki, A., Chochowski, M., Tarjan, D., and Ponti, E. Dynamic memory compression: Retrofitting LLMs for accelerated inference. In Forty-first Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Ouyang, S., Yan, J., Hsu, I., Chen, Y., Jiang, K., Wang, Z., Han, R., Le, L. T., Daruki, S., Tang, X., et al. Rea-soningbank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25140 , 2025a. 12 Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

Ouyang, S., Yan, J., Hsu, I.-H., Chen, Y., Jiang, K., Wang, Z., Han, R., Le, L. T., Daruki, S., Tang, X., Tiru-malashetty, V., Lee, G., Rofouei, M., Lin, H., Han, J., Lee, C.-Y., and Pfister, T. ReasoningBank: Scaling Agent Self-Evolving with Reasoning Memory, Septem-ber 2025b. Padmanabhan, S., Onoe, Y., Zhang, M. J., Durrett, G., and Choi, E. Propagating knowledge updates to LMs through distillation. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural In-formation Processing Systems , 2023. Patil, M., Zhang, T., Wang, X., and Gonzalez, J. E. Go-rilla: Large language model connected with massive apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334 , 2023. Paul, S., Brack, M., Schramowski, P., Kersting, K., and Mundt, M. Core tokensets for data-efficient sequential training of transformers. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops , pp. 5174–5184, 2025. Pink, M., Wu, Q., Vo, V. A., Turek, J., Mu, J., Huth, A., and Toneva, M. Position: Episodic Memory is the Missing Piece for Long-Term LLM Agents, February 2025. Qi, X., Zeng, Y., Xie, T., Chen, P.-Y., Jia, R., Mittal, P., and Henderson, P. Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises safety, even when users do not intend to!, 2023. Rasch, B. and Born, J. About sleep’s role in memory. Phys-iological reviews , 2013. Rebuffi, S.-A., Kolesnikov, A., Sperl, G., and Lampert, C. H. iCaRL: Incremental classifier and representa-tion learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 2001– 2010, 2017. Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Pro-ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Process-ing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pp. 3982–3992, 2019. Rolnick, D., Ahuja, A., Schwarz, J., Lillicrap, T., and Wayne, G. Experience replay for continual learning. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Rymarczyk, D., van de Weijer, J., Zieli’nski, B., and Twar-dowski, B. Icicle: Interpretable class incremental contin-ual learning. 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 1887–1898, 2023. Sarthi, P., Abdullah, S., Tuli, A., Khanna, S., Goldie, A., and Manning, C. D. Raptor: Recursive abstractive pro-cessing for tree-organized retrieval. In The Twelfth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Schuurmans, D. Memory augmented large language models are computationally universal. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04589 , 2023. Sekar, R., Rybkin, O., Daniilidis, K., Abbeel, P., Hafner, D., and Pathak, D. Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 8583–8592. PMLR, 2020. Shah, H., Ghazi, B., Huang, Y., Kumar, R., Yu, D., and Zhang, C. Do language models robustly acquire new knowledge? In AI That Keeps Up: NeurIPS 2025 Work-shop on Continual and Compatible Foundation Model Updates , 2025. Shen, Y., Li, L., Tan, S., Bian, Y., Wang, G., Yin, Y., Liu, W., Zhang, J., and Yang, Q. Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17580 , 2023. Shim, D., Mai, Z., Jeong, J., Sanner, S., Kim, H., and Jang, J. Online class-incremental continual learning with ad-versarial shapley value. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 35, pp. 9630– 9638, 2021. Shin, H., Lee, J. K., Kim, J., and Kim, J. Continual learning with deep generative replay. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 30, 2017. Shuttleworth, R., Andreas, J., Torralba, A., and Sharma, P. Lora vs full fine-tuning: An illusion of equivalence. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21228 , 2024. Snell, C. V., Lee, J., Xu, K., and Kumar, A. Scaling LLM test-time compute optimally can be more effective than scaling parameters for reasoning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. Squire, L. R. Memory systems of the brain: a brief history and current perspective. Neurobiology of learning and memory , 82(3):171–177, 2004. Stickgold, R. Sleep-dependent memory consolidation. Na-ture , 437(7063):1272–1278, 2005. Strauss, V. Stephen hawking famously said, ‘intelligence is the ability to adapt to change.’ but did he really say it? url =https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/answer-sheet/wp/2018/03/29/stephen-hawking-famously-said-intelligence-is-the-ability-to-adapt-to-change-but-did-he-really-say-it/, 2018. 13 Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

Sumers, T., Yao, S., Narasimhan, K. R., and Griffiths, T. L. Cognitive architectures for language agents. Transac-tions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. Sun, Y., Wang, X., Liu, Z., Miller, J., Efros, A., and Hardt, M. Test-time training with self-supervision for general-ization under distribution shifts. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pp. 9229–9248. PMLR, 2020. Sun, Y., Li, X., Dalal, K., Xu, J., Vikram, A., Zhang, G., Dubois, Y., Chen, X., Wang, X., Koyejo, S., et al. Learn-ing to (learn at test time): Rnns with expressive hidden states. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04620 , 2024. Suzgun, M., Yuksekgonul, M., Bianchi, F., Jurafsky, D., and Zou, J. Dynamic cheatsheet: Test-time learning with adaptive memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07952 ,2025a. Suzgun, M., Yuksekgonul, M., Bianchi, F., Jurafsky, D., and Zou, J. Dynamic Cheatsheet: Test-Time Learning with Adaptive Memory, April 2025b. Tack, J., Kim, J., Mitchell, E., Shin, J., Teh, Y. W., and Schwarz, J. R. Online adaptation of language models with a memory of amortized contexts. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2024. Tandon, A., Dalal, K., Li, X., Koceja, D., Rød, M., Buchanan, S., Wang, X., Leskovec, J., Koyejo, S., Hashimoto, T., et al. End-to-end test-time training for long context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23675 , 2025. Tulving, E. et al. Episodic and semantic memory. Organi-zation of memory , 1(381-403):1, 1972. van de Ven, G. M., Siegelmann, H. T., and Tolias, A. S. Brain-inspired replay for continual learning with artifi-cial neural networks. Nature Communications , 11(1): 4069, 2020. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. At-tention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Verwimp, E., De Lange, M., and Tuytelaars, T. Rehearsal revealed: The limits and merits of revisiting samples in continual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 9385– 9394, 2021. Verwimp, E., Aljundi, R., Ben-David, S., Bethge, M., Cossu, A., Gepperth, A., Hayes, T. L., H¨ ullermeier, E., Kanan, C., Kudithipudi, D., Lampert, C. H., et al. Continual learning: Applications and the road forward. 

Transactions in Machine Learning Research , 2024. Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models, October 2023a. Wang, L., Zhang, X., Yang, K., Yu, L., Li, C., Hong, L., Zhang, S., Li, Z., Zhong, Y., and Zhu, J. Memory re-play with data compression for continual learning. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022a. Wang, L., Zhang, X., Su, H., and Zhu, J. A comprehen-sive survey of continual learning: Theory, method and application. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 46(8):5362–5383, 2024a. Wang, Q., Fink, O., Van Gool, L., and Dai, D. Contin-ual test-time domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 7201–7211, 2022b. Wang, Y., Li, P., Sun, M., and Liu, Y. Self-knowledge guided retrieval augmentation for large language mod-els. ENMLP , 2023b. Wang, Y., Gao, Y., Chen, X., Jiang, H., Li, S., Yang, J., Yin, Q., Li, Z., Li, X., Yin, B., Shang, J., and McAuley, J. Memoryllm: Towards self-updatable large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04624 , 2024b. Wiggins, W. F. and Tejani, A. S. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models for natural language process-ing in radiology. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence , 4(4): e220119, 2022. Wu, Y., Liang, S., Zhang, C., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Guo, H., Tang, R., and Liu, Y. From human memory to ai memory: A survey on memory mechanisms in the era of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15965 , 2025. Xiong, H., Yang, Z., Yu, J., Zhuge, Y., Zhang, L., Zhu, J., and Lu, H. Streaming video understanding and multi-round interaction with memory-enhanced knowl-edge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13468 , 2025. Yang, E., Shen, L., Guo, G., Wang, X., Cao, X., Zhang, J., and Tao, D. Model merging in llms, mllms, and beyond: Methods, theories, applications, and opportunities. ACM Computing Surveys , 2024. Ye, H., Gao, Z., Ma, M., Wang, Q., Fu, Y., Chung, M.-Y., Lin, Y., Liu, Z., Zhang, J., Zhuo, D., et al. Kvcomm: Online cross-context kv-cache communication for ef-ficient llm-based multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12872 , 2025. Yin, Q., He, X., Leong, C. T., Wang, F., Yan, Y., Shen, X., and Zhang, Q. Deeper insights without updates: The 14 Position: Modular Memory is the Key to Continual Learning Agents 

power of in-context learning over fine-tuning. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pp. 4138–4151, 2024. Yu, H., Chen, T., Feng, J., Chen, J., Dai, W., Yu, Q., Zhang, Y.-Q., Ma, W.-Y., Liu, J., Wang, M., et al. Mema-gent: Reshaping long-context llm with multi-conv rl-based memory agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02259 ,2025. Zhang, G., Fu, M., and Yan, S. MemGen: Weaving Gen-erative Latent Memory for Self-Evolving Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24704 , 2025a. Zhang, J., Hu, S., Lu, C., Lange, R., and Clune, J. Dar-win Godel Machine: Open-Ended Evolution of Self-Improving Agents, September 2025b. Zhang, Z., Sheng, Y., Zhou, T., Chen, T., Zheng, L., Cai, R., Song, Z., Tian, Y., R´ e, C., Barrett, C., et al. H2o: Heavy-hitter oracle for efficient generative inference of large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:34661–34710, 2023. Zhong, W., Guo, L., Gao, Q., Ye, H., and Wang, Y. Memo-ryBank: Enhancing Large Language Models with Long-Term Memory, May 2023. 15