Title: Discriminative Perception via Anchored Description for Reasoning Segmentation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.04002v1

Published Time: Thu, 05 Mar 2026 01:58:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Discriminative Perception via Anchored Description for Reasoning Segmentation 

## Tao Yang *, Qing Zhou *, Yanliang Li, Qi Wang †

## Northwestern Polytechnical University 

{taoytao, mrazhou, yanliangli }@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, crabwq@gmail.com 

## Abstract 

Reasoning segmentation increasingly employs reinforce-ment learning to generate explanatory reasoning chains that guide Multimodal Large Language Models. While these geometric rewards are primarily confined to guid-ing the final localization, they are incapable of discrimi-nating whether the reasoning process remains anchored on the referred region or strays into irrelevant context. Lack-ing this discriminative guidance, the model’s reasoning of-ten devolves into unfocused and verbose chains that ulti-mately fail to disambiguate and perceive the target in com-plex scenes. This suggests a need to complement the RL ob-jective with Discriminative Perception, an ability to actively distinguish a target from its context. To realize this, we pro-pose DPAD to compel the model to generate a descriptive caption of the referred object, which is then used to explic-itly discriminate by contrasting the caption’s semantic rel-evance to the referred object against the wider context. By optimizing for this discriminative capability, the model is forced to focus on the unique attributes of the target, lead-ing to a more converged and efficient reasoning chain. The descriptive caption also serves as an interpretability ratio-nale that aligns with the segmentation. Experiments on the benchmarks confirm the validity of our approach, deliver-ing substantial performance gains, with the cIoU on Rea-sonSeg increasing by 3.09% and the reasoning chain length decreasing by approximately 42%. Code is available at 

https://github.com/mrazhou/DPAD .

## 1. Introduction 

Reasoning segmentation (RS) [12, 26, 28] challenges mod-els to generate precise pixel-level masks by interpreting nuanced, context-dependent language queries. The task requires the model to perform inference, deciphering im-plicit relational and attributive cues within a query to iso-late the target within a complex visual scene. The ad-vent of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has 

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Corresponding author. The image shows a bear standing in a grassy                

> area with some vegetation and trees in the
> background. The bear's body is covered in fur,
> and it appears to be in a natural habitat. The
> bear's nose is visible in the image, and it is
> the part of the body that is used to detect
> scents. The bear is the main subject , and the
> environment includes grass ,plants , and trees .
> The bear's nose is the body part used to
> receive scent signals. The most closely
> matched object to the body part used to
> receive scent signals is the bear's nose .

100     

> T h i n k : T h e t h i n k i n g p r o c e s s i n v o l v e s
> identifying the body part used to receive
> scent signals in a bear . This is typically the
> nose , as it is the primary organ for detecting
> scents. The bear in the image has a visible
> nose , which is the object of interest.
> Caption: Nose used to receive scent signals.

51   

> The body part used to receive scent signals .
> 41.7%
> ResonSeg
> 117
> 68
> 61.8%
> RefCOCO
> 165
> 63
> ResonSeg RefCOCO
> 0.6 60.8 3.9
> 57.7
> 79.3
> 78.7

Figure 1. Comparison between Seg-Zero’s unfocused reasoning (green ), which leads to lower performance, and DPAD’s focused reasoning ( blue ), which is guided by Discriminative Perception to achieve substantial improvements. 

been pivotal in addressing this challenge [17, 23], leading to architectures that bridge their powerful reasoning capa-bilities with specialized segmentation modules to achieve language-guided, pixel-level understanding. Early architectures like the pioneering LISA [11] re-lied on Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT). The limited out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization of this approach [12, 17], however, catalyzed a paradigm shift towards Reinforcement Learning (RL) to cultivate more generalizable reasoning [3, 8, 23]. Within this shift, Group-Relative Policy Opti-mization (GRPO) [7] has emerged as a compelling choice, demonstrating substantial advantages for fine-tuning mod-els on task-specific rewards [18, 25, 27, 33]. This RL ap-proach facilitated emergent reasoning, where models au-tonomously generate Chains-of-Thought, directly improv-

> arXiv:2603.04002v1 [cs.CV] 4 Mar 2026

ing OOD adaptability in visual tasks. Drawing on this emer-gent reasoning, several works [17, 23, 27, 29] in RS have demonstrated that a pure RL strategy can generate reason-ing chains to navigate cluttered visual contexts, achieving substantial zero-shot performance improvements on chal-lenging benchmarks such as ReasonSeg. Despite their success, these RL-driven paradigms are fundamentally limited by a core learning signal that relies on reward functions based on geometric metrics like IoU and L1 distance [9]. While these geometric metrics are pri-marily confined to guiding the final localization, they offer only indirect or insufficient incentives for the intermediate reasoning process. Indeed, they are incapable of discrimi-nating whether the reasoning process remains anchored on the referred region or strays into irrelevant context. Lacking this discriminative guidance, the model’s reasoning can of-ten devolve into chains that are divergent, unanchored, and verbose. This deficiency is particularly detrimental when effective disambiguation and discerning perception are re-quired, as a divergent reasoning chain inevitably incorpo-rates irrelevant contextual distractors, polluting the seman-tic cues the model relies on [1, 19, 24]. As a result, the model struggles to isolate the true target from a complex scene, as shown in Figure 1. To address this critical gap, we propose a complementation in the learning objective for RS itself—moving beyond mere geometric accuracy to actively cultivate the model’s ability to distinguish the target from its context, a capability termed Discriminative Perception. We realize Discriminative Perception through our method, DPAD ( Discriminative Perception via Anchored 

Description). DPAD introduces a discriminative signal to operate in synergy with the geometric rewards by com-pelling the model to generate an anchored and descriptive caption, subsequently quantifying this caption’s discrimina-tive capability through an innovative criterion that contrasts its semantic relevance to the anchored region against its rel-evance to the wider image context. By optimizing for this discriminative capability, the model’s internal reasoning is implicitly rendered more focused and efficient, leading to an average reduction of approximately 42% in the length of the generated reasoning chains, as shown in Figure 1. More-over, the caption offers a transparent explanation for the segmentation, improving interpretability. We conduct ex-tensive experiments on benchmark datasets to validate our approach, demonstrating that it delivers substantial perfor-mance gains alongside a more focused and efficient reason-ing process. To summarize as follows: • We introduce Discriminative Perception and propose DPAD, which incentivizes focused reasoning via con-trastive discrimination based on an anchored description. • Extensive experiments on challenging reasoning segmen-tation benchmarks validate that DPAD achieves substan-tial performance gains. • Moreover, DPAD provides interpretability through a co-generated descriptive caption and reduces the average length of reasoning chains by approximately 42%. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Image Segmentation 

Image segmentation [5, 30], a fundamental task in com-puter vision, involves partitioning an image into pixel-level masks. The task has evolved from general semantic seg-mentation to more nuanced, language-driven objectives. A key development in this area is Referring Expression Seg-mentation [15, 32], which requires segmenting an object specified by a direct natural language phrase and is eval-uated on standard benchmarks like RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg [34]. Pushing this frontier further, RS [3, 22] challenges models to perform pixel-level localiza-tion based on more complex language instructions that re-quire inference. This task demands a deep synthesis of vi-sual perception and language comprehension to decipher re-lational and abstract cues, thus necessitating models with powerful reasoning abilities. 

2.2. Multimodal Large Language Models 

The development of MLLMs [13] represents a significant breakthrough in artificial intelligence, bridging the gap be-tween visual perception and natural language understand-ing. Pre-trained on vast image-text datasets, these models build internal representations that capture a deep seman-tic alignment between modalities, allowing them to excel at diverse tasks like visual question answering [10], im-age captioning [16, 31, 35], and complex reasoning [4]. Their ability to comprehend nuanced, context-dependent queries establishes them as a foundational technology for advanced vision-language tasks. These powerful, general-purpose reasoning capabilities, once demonstrated on high-level, holistic image tasks, now pave the way for specialized downstream applications that demand fine-grained, pixel-level understanding, such as reasoning segmentation [22]. 

2.3. Reasoning Segmentation with MLLMs 

Reasoning segmentation leverages the advanced capabili-ties of MLLMs to perform pixel-level localization based on complex language instructions. The development of this field has undergone a critical paradigm shift from Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) to Reinforcement Learning (RL). Early representative methods, such as LISA [11], applied SFT but faced limitations in generalization when dealing with out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios. To ad-dress this issue, the state-of-the-art has shifted towards RL-based methods, represented by Seg-Zero [17]. By employ-ing techniques such as Group-Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), these models can elicit the emergent generation of chains of thought without explicit reasoning supervi-sion, significantly enhancing zero-shot performance. Con-currently, this paradigm introduces new considerations for reward mechanism design. The geometric reward signals that current methods rely on provide only localization guid-ance and are unable to discriminate the quality of the rea-soning chain. During the learning process, a model might find a pathway that achieves the final localization, but this pathway is not necessarily the most focused or insightful. 

## 3. Methodology 

This section details our proposed method, DPAD. Within an RL-driven framework, DPAD complements rewards for format adherence and geometric accuracy by fostering the model’s “Discriminative Perception” for more focused and efficient reasoning segmentation. 

3.1. Problem Formulation 

Reasoning segmentation, the task of generating a mask M

from a given image I and a language query Q, is formulated in our work within an RL framework built upon a decoupled architecture. In this paradigm, a trainable MLLM acts as a reasoning policy, π, to produce localization prompts. These prompts are then consumed by a frozen segmentation model to render the final mask. For a given state s = ( I, Q ), this policy is trained to generate a token sequence Y containing a reasoning chain 

T , a geometric localization A, and an anchored descriptive caption C, with the generation process expressed as: 

Y = ( T, A, C ) ∼ π(·| s) (1) The final mask M is then deterministically produced by the localization A via a frozen segmentation module, Fseg ,such that M = Fseg (I, A ). The overarching objective of the RL framework is to learn an optimal policy π∗ that max-imizes the expected final reward, Rf inal . This reward func-tion directly evaluates the quality of the generated sequence 

Y . The optimization objective is formally defined as: 

π∗ = arg max  

> π

EY ∼π(·| s)[Rf inal (Y, s )] (2) 

3.2. Discriminative Perception 

To address the unfocused and verbose reasoning chains pro-duced by existing RL frameworks, we introduce DPAD (Discriminative Perception via Anchored Description), as shown in Figure 2. Our method stimulates the model’s “Dis-criminative Perception” by requiring the MLLM policy to generate an anchored descriptive caption for its localiza-tion, which in turn enables a discriminative reward. This process compels the generation of more focused and effi-cient reasoning chains. 

Anchored Descriptive Caption. In addition to the rea-soning chain ( T ) and geometric localization ( A), our frame-work requires the MLLM policy to generate a concise and anchored caption ( C). This caption’s purpose is twofold. First, it serves as a human-readable rationale that explains the model’s final localization, enhancing the framework’s overall interpretability. Second, and more critically, it acts as the semantic foundation for our reward signal, providing the necessary content to evaluate the model’s discriminative ability. The caption is considered “anchored” because it is prompted to describe the object identified by the model’s own geometric localization output ( A). 

Discriminative Perception Reward. This reward is the technical core of DPAD, designed to quantify and incen-tivize the model’s discriminative perception. As illustrated in Figure 2, this reward, Rdpad , is calculated by contrast-ing the caption’s relevance to the target versus the broader context. To achieve this, we define the Region of Interest (ROI) as the image crop bounded by the ground-truth box, and the All of Image (AOI) as the entire image. Using a pre-trained vision-language model (e.g., CLIP), we extract semantic features from both the text and the image modal-ities. Let VC denote the text feature embedding of the cap-tion C, and let VROI and VAOI denote the visual feature embeddings of the ROI and AOI, respectively. The seman-tic similarity function between a generic text feature vector 

VT and a visual feature vector VI is defined as follows: 

Sim( VT , V I ) = VT · VI

∥VT ∥∥ VI ∥ (3) Based on this, we derive ROI Score, S1 = Sim( VC , V ROI ),and AOI Score, S2 = Sim( VC , V AOI ). An effective caption must be more relevant to the ROI than to the image as a whole. We thus formulate our final discriminative signal, 

∆, to reflect this principle: 

∆ = max(0 , S 1 − S2) (4) Here, the term (S1 −S2) quantifies the discriminative power of the caption. The discriminative reward, Rdpad , is then formalized as follows: 

Rdpad =

(

1, if ∆ > 00, if ∆ = 0 (5) 

3.3. Final Reward and Optimization 

The complete reward signal, Rfinal , is a composite function designed to guide the policy from multiple perspectives, as illustrated in Figure 2. It is composed of three components. 

Format Validation Reward ( Rformat ). This reward ensures the model’s outputs adhere to a predefined struc-ture. We employ three specific checks. First, a regular ex-pression verifies the presence and order of the <think> ,Reward 

> Discriminative
> Perception

MLLM 

SAM 

> If we were observing the
> sunset and its beautiful
> colors from the vantage
> point ..., what natural
> feature would obstruct our
> view to some extent?

Reason         

> <think>...</think>
> <answer>...</answer>
> <caption>...</caption>
> <answer> {'bbox':
> [......], 'P1': [..],
> 'P2':[..]} </answer>
> <caption> Tree
> silhouette ... sunset
> view.</caption>
> Format Validation
> Geometric Location
> if Match: Reward = 1
> else: Reward = 0
> IoU > 0.5: Reward = 1
> else: 0; L1 < T :
> Reward = 1else: 0

Discrimination 

),0( 21 SSmax   

> 00Reward Reward

0  

> Tree silhouette obstruct sthe
> sunset view .
> 1ROI S

1

T

A

C

CLIP CLIP  

> 2AOI S

Figure 2. An overview of the DPAD framework, where a MLLM generates a reasoning chain ( T ), a geometric localization ( A), and an anchored descriptive caption ( C). The core of our method is the Discriminative Perception reward, which uses the generated caption to derive a Region of Interest (ROI) Score ( S1) and an All of Image (AOI) Score ( S2). The contrast between these scores provides a binary reward signal that incentivizes the model to generate focused reasoning capable of distinguishing the target from its context. 

<answer> , and <caption> tags. Second, a parser val-idates the JSON object within the <answer> tag, en-suring it contains the required keys (“bbox”, “points 1”, “points 2”) and that their values are correctly formatted. Finally, a check confirms the presence of an anchored de-scriptive caption ( C) within the model’s output. All checks return a binary reward of 1.0 for success and 0.0 for failure, ensuring strict adherence to the desired output format. 

Geometric Location Reward ( Rgeo ). This reward eval-uates the geometric accuracy of the localization output ( A)to enhance spatial precision. It is a composite of several sub-rewards. An IoU-based reward is calculated, yielding a score of 1.0 if the Intersection over Union between the pre-dicted and ground-truth bounding boxes exceeds 0.5, and 0.0 otherwise. We also employ L1 distance-based rewards for both the bounding box and key points. These provide a reward of 1.0 if the distance is below a set threshold and 0.0 otherwise. This combination of metrics ensures the local-ization is both spatially accurate and correctly positioned. The final reward is formulated as follows: 

Rfinal = Rformat + Rgeo + Rdpad (6) 

Optimization. The MLLM policy, π, is then fine-tuned using GRPO to maximize the expected Rfinal . By optimiz-ing this composite objective, the policy is compelled to gen-erate reasoning chains that are not only geometrically accu-rate but also semantically focused. This process implicitly prunes divergent and verbose thoughts, forcing the model to concentrate on the unique attributes that distinguish the target, thereby leading to more efficient reasoning and im-proved segmentation performance. 

Table 1. Performance comparison on existing benchmarks. Sym-bol † denotes scores reported in the paper while ∗ denotes our re-production with official code and model checkpoint. Our method achieves improvements on ReasonSeg. 

Method val test gIoU cIoU gIoU cIoU OVSeg 28.5 18.6 26.1 20.8 ReLA 22.4 19.9 21.3 22.0 Grounded-SAM 26.0 14.5 21.3 16.4 LISA-7B-LLaVA1.5 53.6 52.3 48.7 48.8 LISA-13B-LLaVA1.5 57.7 60.3 53.8 50.8 SAM4MLLM 46.7 48.1 - -Qwen2.5VL-3B + SAM2 53.8 44.1 47.6 37.4 Seg-Zero-7B † 62.6 62.0 57.5 52.0 Seg-Zero-7B ∗ 60.9 57.3 57.7 54.4 

DPAD-7B (ours) 63.1 61.2 60.8 57.5 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Experimental Settings 

We adopt a frozen CLIP model (ViT-B/32) as the seman-tic scorer to extract both textual and visual features for the computation of Rdpad . To rigorously evaluate our proposed method, DPAD, we utilize a range of standard benchmarks for reasoning and referring expression segmentation. 

Training Data. Our model is trained exclusively on a small subset of 3,000 samples from the RefCOCOg dataset [34]. This minimal training set is smaller than those used in prior works, which underscores the superior data and learn-ing efficiency of our method. We do not use any datasets with explicit reasoning chain annotations for training. 

Evaluation Benchmarks. The performance of our pro-posed method, DPAD, is evaluated on several benchmarks. Table 2. Performance comparison on existing benchmarks. Sym-bol † denotes scores reported in the paper while ∗ denotes our re-production with official code and model checkpoint. Our method achieves improvements in cIoU on RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg. 

Method RefCOCO RefCOCO+ RefCOCOg testA testA test LAVT 75.8 68.4 62.1 ReLA 76.5 71.0 66.0 LISA-7B 76.5 67.4 68.5 PixelLM-7B 76.5 71.7 70.5 MagNet 78.3 73.6 69.3 Seg-Zero-7B † 80.3 76.2 72.6 Seg-Zero-7B ∗ 78.7 74.4 71.3 

DPAD-7B (ours) 79.3 74.7 72.6 

We use ReasonSeg as our primary benchmark to assess the model’s generalization capability on complex and nuanced queries. Furthermore, the model’s robustness and zero-shot transfer capabilities are validated on the standard test splits of RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg. 

4.2. Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate our model from two perspectives: segmenta-tion performance and discriminative perception capability. 

Segmentation Performance. We adopt global Intersec-tion over Union (gIoU) and cumulative Intersection over Union (cIoU) to rigorously assess pixel-level mask predic-tion. Specifically, gIoU averages the IoU scores across all samples to provide a robust instance-level evaluation that weights small and large targets equally. Conversely, cIoU computes the ratio of total intersection to total union areas across the entire dataset, offering a stable macro-level mea-surement of pixel precision. 

Discriminative Perception Capability. To evaluate the discriminative specificity of the model’s outputs towards the target, we introduce a suite of semantic metrics for both the descriptive caption ( C) and the reasoning chain ( T ). For the caption, we measure its similarity to the ROI ( S1) and the AOI ( S2), deriving a Semantic Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR = S1/S 2) to quantify its discriminative power. Sim-ilarly, to analyze the internal reasoning process, we com-pute T S 1 and T S 2 as the similarities of T to the ROI and AOI, respectively, yielding the Reasoning SNR ( TSNR = 

T S 1/T S 2). High values for S1 and T S 1 indicate strong target relevance, while high SNR and TSNR demonstrate precise contextual specificity. 

4.3. Implementation Details 

Architecture. Our framework follows a decoupled de-sign. We use Qwen2.5-VL [2] as the reasoning model and 

> Table 3. Performance and efficiency across different Query Types on ReasonSeg.

Query gIoU ( ↑) #Tok ( ↓)Base DPAD Base DPAD Attribute 61.22 64.29 97.76 59.95 

Relation 58.47 62.17 91.73 63.00 

Logic 44.92 47.03 110.22 68.30 

> Table 4. Performance and efficiency across different Difficulty lev-els on ReasonSeg.

Difficulty gIoU ( ↑) #Tok ( ↓)Base DPAD Base DPAD Easy 68.37 73.04 91.62 59.28 

Medium 58.91 61.69 96.29 61.66 

Hard 45.19 47.48 105.06 62.17  

> Table 5. Comparison of discriminative perception metrics for DPAD and Seg-Zero on ReasonSeg.

Metric Seg-zero-7B DPAD-7B (ours) 

val test val test Tokens# 117.50 111.90 68.49 68.52 

S1 - - 25.54 25.53 S2 - - 22.77 22.63 SNR - - 1.15 1.16 

TS 1 21.83 23.18 22.14 22.07 TS 2 22.37 24.74 21.28 21.31 TSNR 0.98 0.94 1.05 1.04 

a frozen SAM2-Large [20] as the segmentation module. 

Training. We use a batch size of 16 and a sampling num-ber of 8 for each training step. The initial learning rate is set to 1 × 10 −6 with a weight decay of 0.01. The reward weights λ are fixed at 1.0 by default. The discriminative reward Rdpad is calculated using a frozen CLIP (ViT-B/32) model, which is entirely discarded during inference. 

4.4. Experimental Results 

Segmentation Performance. We compare our method, DPAD, against a comprehensive suite of state-of-the-art approaches, including OVSeg [14], ReLA [14], Grounded-SAM [21], LISA-7B-LLaVA1.5 [11], LISA-13B-LLaVA1.5 [11], SAM4MLLM [4], Qwen2.5VL-3B + SAM2 [27], LAVT [32], PixelLM-7B [22], MagNet [6], and Seg-Zero-7B [17]. As demonstrated in Table 1 and Ta-ble 2, our DPAD-7B achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple challenging benchmarks. On the ReasonSeg dataset, DPAD-7B yields substantial improvements over the What can be used to     

> mix the ingredients and
> provide a convenient
> way to drink the cocktail? Think: The image shows two glasses
> containing a dark red liquid, which is
> likely a cocktail... In the image, the
> highball glass is the object that can
> be used to mix the ingredients and
> provide a convenient way to drink
> the cocktail.

106          

> Think: The thinking process involves
> identifying the object in the ... The
> object in question is the straw in the
> taller glass. The straw is used to stir
> the cocktail and also to drink it.
> Caption: Ared straw used for mixing
> and drinking the cocktail.

60          

> Butterflies are attracted
> to certain ... What part of
> the plant in the picture is
> likely to attract butterflies? Think: The image shows a butterfly
> p e r c h e d o n a p u r p l e f l o w e r.
> Butterflies are attracted to certain
> types of plants because they provide
> them ... The butterfly's proboscis is
> extended, which is a sign that it is
> feeding on the nectar of the flower.

87   

> Think: The thinking process involves
> identifying the part of the plant ... In
> the picture, the butterfly is perched
> on a purple flower, which is the part
> of the plant that is likely to attract
> butterflies.
> Caption: A purple flower.

58         

> The transportation vehicle
> t h at d o e s n o t re q u i re
> electricity or gasoline. Think: The image shows a red sports
> car parked on a street. There is also a
> bicycle parked on the sidewalk next
> to a \"No Standing Anytime\" sign ...
> The bicycle is the most closely
> matched object in terms of not
> requiring electricity or gasoline.

98        

> Think: The thinking process ... The
> object in question is a bicycle , which
> is a human-powered transportation
> vehicle. The bicycle is parked next to
> the red car , and it is the only object
> in the image that fits this description.
> Caption: A bicycle.

54 Figure 3. Qualitative comparison between the Seg-Zero and our DPAD. The figure illustrates examples where Seg-Zero produces “Long & Unfocused” reasoning chains that often stray into irrelevant context before identifying the target. In contrast, DPAD generates “Short & Focused” chains that are more converged and efficient. This demonstrates how DPAD’s Discriminative Perception leads to more precise reasoning and a significant reduction in token count. 

strong Seg-Zero-7B ∗ baseline, boosting gIoU from 57.7 to 60.8 (+3.1) and cIoU from 54.4 to 57.5 (+3.1). This signifi-cant gain confirms that explicitly cultivating discriminative perception enhances the model’s capacity to disambiguate targets from complex distractors. Furthermore, we evaluate the zero-shot generalization of DPAD-7B on the RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg test splits. As shown in Ta-ble 2, our model outpaces the Seg-Zero-7B ∗ across all three datasets, achieving 79.3 (+0.6) on RefCOCO, 74.7 (+0.3) on RefCOCO+, and 72.6 (+1.3) on RefCOCOg. These con-sistent improvements underscore that our discriminative re-ward mechanism inherently strengthens cross-domain ro-bustness and zero-shot transferability. 

Stratified Analysis. To further investigate the robust-ness of our approach, we stratify the ReasonSeg test set by query type (Attribute, Relation, Logic) and difficulty (Easy, Medium, Hard). Following the complexity assessment pro-tocol in [27], we utilize Qwen2.5-VL-72B to categorize the queries based on scene ambiguity and cognitive complexity. As detailed in Table 3 and Table 4, DPAD consistently out-performs the baseline across all data splits. When examin-ing query types (Table 3), the baseline exhibits a clear token explosion on complex Logic queries, consuming over 110 

Table 6. Comparison of discriminative perception metrics for DPAD and Seg-Zero on RefCOCO testA (o), RefCOCO testA (+), RefCOCOg test (g). 

Metric Seg-zero-7B DPAD-7B (ours) 

o + g o + gTokens# 165.1 159.9 159.8 63.13 62.88 66.79 

S1 - - - 24.30 24.64 25.91 S2 - - - 20.54 19.51 22.28 SNR - - - 1.24 1.34 1.21 

TS 1 19.66 19.69 20.15 21.83 21.30 22.67 TS 2 21.41 21.36 22.50 19.82 18.98 20.98 TSNR 0.92 0.93 0.90 1.11 1.14 1.09 

tokens on average. DPAD successfully mitigates this ver-bosity, compressing the reasoning chain by approximately 38% while still delivering a +2 .11 gIoU improvement. Fur-thermore, DPAD achieves even more pronounced accuracy gains on Attribute ( +3 .07 gIoU) and Relation ( +3 .70 gIoU) queries, demonstrating its broad versatility. A similarly compelling trend emerges across varying difficulty levels Table 7. Ablation of reward formulations on ReasonSeg. The best results are highlighted in bold. 

Method val test gIoU cIoU gIoU cIoU Baseline 60.9 57.3 57.7 54.4 + Difference 61.3 58.8 57.6 54.3 + Scaled 62.6 54.0 58.4 57.5 

DPAD (Binary) 63.1 61.2 60.8 57.5 

(Table 4). On Easy and Medium subsets, DPAD secures substantial performance boosts of +4 .67 and +2 .78 gIoU. Notably, on the most challenging Hard scenarios, DPAD yields a +2 .29 improvement in gIoU while drastically re-ducing the reasoning token count by nearly 41% (from 105.06 to 62.17). Crucially, while the baseline’s token us-age fluctuates wildly with task complexity, DPAD main-tains a remarkably stable reasoning length ranging only from 59 to 68 tokens across all stratifications. These fine-grained results robustly validate our core premise that prun-ing divergent thoughts effectively cultivates a generalizable and efficient reasoning paradigm without compromising the model’s capacity for complex logical deduction. 

Discriminative Perception Capability. Beyond seg-mentation accuracy, we analyze the model’s internal behav-ior using our proposed metrics to strictly assess discrimina-tive capability and reasoning efficiency. As detailed in Ta-ble 5 and Table 6, DPAD-7B consistently achieves SNR and 

TSNR values exceeding the critical threshold of 1.0 across all test sets, whereas the Seg-Zero-7B baseline consistently falls below this mark. On the ReasonSeg benchmark, for in-stance, DPAD-7B records an SNR of 1.16 and a TSNR of 

1.04 . Surpassing this 1.0 threshold signifies that the gener-ated text aligns more closely with the target ROI than with the broader image context. This provides direct quantitative evidence that DPAD acquires true discriminative percep-tion, effectively distinguishing the target from background distractors and mitigating the tendency of prior methods to incorporate irrelevant contextual noise. Furthermore, this enhanced target focus directly translates to vastly improved reasoning efficiency. Evaluated by the average token count, DPAD-7B generates significantly more concise reasoning chains. On the ReasonSeg test set, the required token count drops from 117 .90 to 68 .52 (a 41 .7% reduction). A sim-ilar trend emerges across the RefCOCO variants, with the RefCOCOg test set exhibiting a substantial decrease from 

159 .80 to 66 .79 (a 58 .2% reduction). These compelling re-sults lend robust empirical support to our hypothesis that optimizing for discriminative perception implicitly prunes divergent thoughts, thereby compelling the model toward highly converged and efficient reasoning. 

Qualitative Analysis. To provide an intuitive under-

> Table 8. Ablation study of different reward formulations in cIoU on RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and RefCOCOg test sets, showing cIoU scores. Best results are highlighted in bold.

Method RefCOCO RefCOCO+ RefCOCOg testA testA test Baseline 78.7 74.4 71.3 + Difference 77.2 73.2 70.8 + Scaled 78.4 74.6 71.6 

DPAD (Binary) 79.3 74.7 72.6 200 400 600 

> Sample Index
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 300
> Token Count
> DPAD
> Seg-Zero
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 300
> Figure 4. Per-sample token count comparison on the ReasonSeg test. DPAD is shown in blue, and Seg-Zero is shown in green.

standing of our method’s impact, we present a multi-faceted analysis in Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 5. Figure 3 presents a direct qualitative comparison be-tween the reasoning processes of DPAD and the Seg-Zero baseline. The visualizations illustrate how DPAD’s core principle, Discriminative Perception, addresses the verbose and unfocused chains typical of prior methods. By explic-itly incentivizing target-relevant descriptions, our frame-work actively prunes divergent global scenes, irrelevant ob-jects, and redundant self-confirmations from the internal thought process. For instance, in identifying an object for a cocktail, Seg-Zero strays into irrelevant context, while DPAD immediately identifies the correct object (the straw), effectively cutting the token count from 106 to 60. This powerful disambiguation capability is equally evident in the non-electric vehicle example; DPAD avoids distraction from the visually dominant sports car and correctly locates the bicycle, reducing the token count from 98 to 54. This efficiency is not an anomaly. Figure 4 extends this analysis to every sample in the ReasonSeg test set, plotting the token count for each individual inference. The scatter plot reveals that DPAD’s token counts (blue) are consis-ReasonSeg  

> (val)
> ReasonSeg
> (test)
> RefCOCO+
> (testA)
> RefCOCO
> (testA) RefCOCOg
> (test)
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 150
> 175
> 200
> 225
> Token Count
> Seg-Zero
> DPAD Figure 5. Comparison of the average token counts generated by DPAD and Seg-Zero across five datasets. The lines represent the mean values, while the shaded areas indicate the standard devia-tion. The results confirm that DPAD accomplishes accurate rea-soning using significantly fewer tokens and exhibiting lower vari-ance across all benchmarks.

tently clustered in a low, tight band, demonstrating stable and highly efficient performance. In contrast, Seg-Zero’s counts (green) are not only significantly higher on average but also exhibit much greater variance across samples. Furthermore, Figure 5 provides compelling evidence for how our method’s focused reasoning translates into supe-rior efficiency and stability across five distinct benchmarks. As a direct result of our discriminative optimization, DPAD maintains a consistently low average token count (the blue line, approximately 65 tokens) with a narrow variance band, signifying robust, low-variance reasoning. Conversely, Seg-Zero’s unfocused process leads to a substantially higher and more volatile token count. This instability is visually evi-dent in its fluctuating average and wide variance band, re-vealing a high-variance reasoning process that is overly sen-sitive to dataset-specific complexities. Overall, these visualizations robustly support our cen-tral thesis that by compelling the model to generate an an-chored description and optimizing for a discriminative re-ward, DPAD successfully cultivates a highly focused and efficient reasoning paradigm. This not only improves quan-titative performance but also produces transparent reason-ing chains devoid of irrelevant contextual noise. 

4.5. Ablation Study 

To investigate the impact of different reward formulations, we conduct an ablation study with results detailed in Table 7 and Table 8. We compare our final DPAD model equipped with a binary reward against a Baseline trained without any discriminative signal, alongside two alternative continuous reward designs. The first alternative is a “Difference” re-ward formulated as R = S1 − S2, and the second is a “Scaled” reward calculated as R = S1 × max(0 , S 1 − S2).A clear performance hierarchy emerges across all bench-marks. On the ReasonSeg dataset (Table 7), all three re-ward formulations yield improvements over the Baseline. The “Difference” reward improves the validation gIoU to 61.3 (+0.4), while the “Scaled” variant reaches 62.6 (+1.7). Crucially, our binary reward establishes the best perfor-mance among all variants, boosting validation gIoU to 63.1 (+2.2) and cIoU to 61.2 (+3.9). This trajectory extends to the RefCOCO experiments (Table 8). All variants surpass the Baseline, with the binary reward uniformly securing the highest scores across the three test splits, highlighted by a notable cIoU of 72.6 on the challenging RefCOCOg bench-mark. We attribute the clear superiority of the binary reward to its signal format, which is highly compatible with the internal optimization mechanics of our framework. Specif-ically, our system—including the Format Validation reward (Rformat ) and the Geometric Location reward ( Rgeo )— fundamentally relies on discrete success-or-failure signals to guide the GRPO-based policy updates. Our binary dis-criminative reward aligns with this effective paradigm, pro-viding unambiguous feedback on whether the model dis-tinguishes the target. In contrast, while continuous rewards offer more granular semantic information, their inherent nu-merical noise and scale fluctuations actively interfere with the stable convergence of the RL policy. 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced DPAD, a framework that miti-gates unfocused reasoning in segmentation models by fos-tering discriminative perception. By compelling the MLLM to generate an anchored descriptive caption, DPAD learns to explicitly distinguish targets from their context, yielding a highly converged and efficient reasoning process. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DPAD achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple challenging benchmarks, including ReasonSeg and the RefCOCO suite. Crucially, these accuracy gains are accompanied by an approximate 

42% reduction in reasoning chain length and discrimina-tive signals ( SNR and TSNR ) consistently exceeding the critical 1.0 threshold. Beyond quantitative improvements, DPAD significantly enhances interpretability through its co-generated captions. Ultimately, our findings suggest that optimizing for discriminative perception offers a highly promising pathway toward building accurate, focused, and efficient Multimodal Large Language Models for complex visual reasoning tasks. Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Natural Sci-ence Foundation of China under Grants 62471394 and U21B2041. 

## References 

[1] Pranjal Aggarwal and Sean Welleck. L1: Controlling How Long a Reasoning Model Thinks with Reinforcement Learn-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04697 , 2025. 2 [2] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025. 5 [3] Chao Chen, Jiacheng Xu, Weijian Liao, Hao Ding, Zongzhang Zhang, Yang Yu, and Rui Zhao. Focus-then-Decide: Segmentation-assisted Reinforcement Learning. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , pages 11240–11248, 2024. 1, 2 [4] Yi-Chia Chen, Wei-Hua Li, Cheng Sun, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Chu-Song Chen. SAM4MLLM: Enhance Multi-modal Large Language Model for Referring Expression Seg-mentation. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 323–340. Springer, 2024. 2, 5 [5] Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G Schwing, Alexan-der Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-attention Mask Transformer for Universal Image Segmentation. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1290–1299, 2022. 2 [6] Yong Xien Chng, Henry Zheng, Yizeng Han, Xuchong Qiu, and Gao Huang. Mask grounding for referring image seg-mentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 26573– 26583, 2024. 5 [7] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-RL: Incentivizing Reason-ing Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. 1 [8] Duojun Huang, Xinyu Xiong, Jie Ma, Jichang Li, Zequn Jie, Lin Ma, and Guanbin Li. AlignSAM: Aligning Seg-ment Anything Model to Open Context via Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3205– 3215, 2024. 1 [9] Jiaqi Huang, Zunnan Xu, Jun Zhou, Ting Liu, Yicheng Xiao, Mingwen Ou, Bowen Ji, Xiu Li, and Kehong Yuan. SAM-RL: Leveraging SAM for Reward Feedback in Multimodal Segmentation via Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22596 , 2025. 2 [10] Ngoc Dung Huynh, Mohamed Reda Bouadjenek, Sunil Aryal, Imran Razzak, and Hakim Hacid. Visual Question Answering: From Early Developments to Recent Advances– A Survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03939 , 2025. 2 [11] Xin Lai, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Yanwei Li, Yuhui Yuan, Shu Liu, and Jiaya Jia. Lisa: Reasoning Segmentation via Large Language Model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 9579–9589, 2024. 1, 2, 5 [12] Liulei Li, Wenguan Wang, and Yi Yang. LogicSeg: Parsing Visual Semantics with Neural Logic Learning and Reason-ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-ence on Computer Vision , pages 4122–4133, 2023. 1 [13] Yanwei Li, Yuechen Zhang, Chengyao Wang, Zhisheng Zhong, Yixin Chen, Ruihang Chu, Shaoteng Liu, and Jiaya Jia. Mini-Gemini: Mining the Potential of Multi-modality Vision Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18814 ,2024. 2 [14] Feng Liang, Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Kunpeng Li, Yinan Zhao, Hang Zhang, Peizhao Zhang, Peter Vajda, and Diana Marculescu. Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with mask-adapted clip. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 7061–7070, 2023. 5 [15] Chang Liu, Henghui Ding, and Xudong Jiang. Gres: Gen-eralized referring expression segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 23592–23601, 2023. 2 [16] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual Instruction Tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:34892–34916, 2023. 2 [17] Yuqi Liu, Bohao Peng, Zhisheng Zhong, Zihao Yue, Fanbin Lu, Bei Yu, and Jiaya Jia. Seg-zero: Reasoning-chain Guided Segmentation via Cognitive Reinforcement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06520 , 2025. 1, 2, 5 [18] Yuqi Liu, Tianyuan Qu, Zhisheng Zhong, Bohao Peng, Shu Liu, Bei Yu, and Jiaya Jia. VisionReasoner: Unified Vi-sual Perception and Reasoning via Reinforcement Learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12081 , 2025. 1 [19] Xiaoye Qu, Yafu Li, Zhaochen Su, Weigao Sun, Jianhao Yan, Dongrui Liu, Ganqu Cui, Daizong Liu, Shuxian Liang, Junx-ian He, et al. A Survey of Efficient Reasoning for Large Reasoning Models: Language, Multimodality, and Beyond. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21614 , 2025. 2 [20] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman R¨ adle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 , 2024. 5 [21] Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang, Yukang Chen, Feng Yan, et al. Grounded SAM: Assembling Open-World Models for Diverse Visual Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159 ,2024. 5 [22] Zhongwei Ren, Zhicheng Huang, Yunchao Wei, Yao Zhao, Dongmei Fu, Jiashi Feng, and Xiaojie Jin. PixelLM: Pixel Reasoning with Large Multimodal Model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 26374–26383, 2024. 2, 5 [23] Yiqing Shen, Chenjia Li, Fei Xiong, Jeong-O Jeong, Tian-peng Wang, Michael Latman, and Mathias Unberath. Rea-soning Segmentation for Images and Videos: A Survey. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18816 , 2025. 1, 2 [24] Yang Sui, Yu-Neng Chuang, Guanchu Wang, Jiamu Zhang, Tianyi Zhang, Jiayi Yuan, Hongyi Liu, Andrew Wen, Shaochen Zhong, Hanjie Chen, et al. Stop Overthinking: A Survey on Efficient Reasoning for Large Language Models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16419 , 2025. 2 [25] Xie Ting, Ye Huang, Zhilin Liu, and Lixin Duan. Semantic Segmentation with Reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17905 , 2025. 1 [26] Junchi Wang and Lei Ke. LLM-Seg: Bridging Image Seg-mentation and Large Language Model Reasoning. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1765–1774, 2024. 1 [27] Song Wang et al. PixelThink: Towards Efficient Chain-of-Pixel Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23727 , 2025. 1, 2, 5, 6 [28] XuDong Wang, Shaolun Zhang, Shufan Li, Konstantinos Kallidromitis, Kehan Li, Yusuke Kato, Kazuki Kozuka, and Trevor Darrell. SegLLM: Multi-round Reasoning Segmen-tation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18923 , 2024. 1 [29] Yibin Wang, Zhimin Li, Yuhang Zang, Chunyu Wang, Qinglin Lu, Cheng Jin, and Jiaqi Wang. Unified Multi-modal Chain-of-Thought Reward Model through Reinforce-ment Fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03318 , 2025. 2[30] Yuwen Xiong, Renjie Liao, Hengshuang Zhao, Rui Hu, Min Bai, Ersin Yumer, and Raquel Urtasun. UPSNet: A Uni-fied Panoptic Segmentation Network. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8818–8826, 2019. 2 [31] Tao Yang, Qing Zhou, and Qi Wang. Dia: Deriving linguis-tic information from auxiliary languages for remote sensing image captioning. Pattern Recognition , 171:112209, 2026. 2[32] Zhao Yang, Jiaqi Wang, Yansong Tang, Kai Chen, Heng-shuang Zhao, and Philip HS Torr. LAVT: Language-aware Vision Transformer for Referring Image Segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition , pages 18155–18165, 2022. 2, 5[33] Zuyao You and Zuxuan Wu. Seg-r1: Segmentation can be surprisingly simple with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22624 , 2025. 1 [34] Licheng Yu, Patrick Poirson, Shan Yang, Alexander C Berg, and Tamara L Berg. Modeling Context in Referring Expres-sions. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 69–85. Springer, 2016. 2, 4 [35] Qing Zhou, Junyu Gao, Yuan Yuan, and Qi Wang. Single-stream extractor network with contrastive pre-training for remote-sensing change captioning. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 62:1–14, 2024. 2 Discriminative Perception via Anchored Description for Reasoning Segmentation 

# Supplementary Material Query: When taking a dog for a walk 

on the beach, what part of the dog's 

body should be wet if it enjoys 

playing in the water? 

Think: The thinking process involves 

identifying the part of the dog's body 

that would be wet if it enjoys playing 

in the water. The dog in the image is 

standing in shallow water, and the 

part of the dog's body that would be 

wet is the lower legs and paws. 

56 

Think: The image shows a dog on a 

beach with its paws in the water. The 

dog appears to be enjoying itself. The 

question asks what part of the dog's 

body should be wet if it enjoys playing 

in the water. Given the context, the 

146 

paws of the dog are the part that would be most likely to be wet, 

as they are in direct contact with the water. The dog's paws are 

the part of the body that would be wet if it enjoys playing in the 

water. The paws are the only part of the dog's body that are in 

the water, and they are the part that would get wet from playing 

in the water. The answer should be the paws of the dog, as they 

are the part of the body that would be wet if the dog enjoys 

playing in the water. Caption: The lower legs and paws of the dog .

Query: When a cat is interested in 

something and wants to observe it 

carefully, what part of the cat's body 

in the picture is most likely to be the 

focus of attention? 

Think: The thinking process involves 

identifying the part of the cat's body 

that is most likely to be the focus of 

attention when the cat is interested in 

something. Typically, when a cat is 

interested, it will look directly at the 

object of interest. In the picture, the 

85 

Think: The image shows a cat lying on 

a wooden floor. The cat's body is 

relaxed, and it is looking directly at 

the camera with a focused expression. 

The cat's ears are perked up, which is 

a common sign of interest . The eyes 

160 

are wide open, and the pupils are dilated, indicating that the cat 

is paying close attention to something. In the context of the 

question, when a cat is interested in something and wants to 

observe it carefully, the most likely part of the cat's body to be 

the focus of attention would be the eyes. The eyes are the most 

expressive part of the cat's face and are the first thing that 

catches attention when a cat is observing something. In the 

image, the cat's eyes are clearly visible and appear to be focused 

on something in front of it. Therefore, the eyes are the most 

likely part of the cat's body to be the focus of attention. Caption: The cat's eyes .

cat is looking directly at the camera, which suggests it is focused 

on something in front of it. The part of the body that is most likely 

to be the focus of attention is the eyes. 

Query: The spare tire that is not 

used currently. 

Think: The thinking process involves 

identifying the spare tire that is not 

currently in use. The spare tire is 

located at the rear of the vehicle, and 

in this image, it is visible on the right 

side of the car. The tire is not inflated 

and is covered with a protective cover, 

indicating it is not in use. 

57 

Think: The image shows a vintage race 

car o n display w i t h a s p a re t i re 

mounted on the side. The car is 

parked on a grassy area, and there are 

people in the background observing it. 

The spare tire is located on the side of 

135 

the car, and it is clearly visible in the image. The question asks to 

find the spare tire that is not used currently and compare the 

difference between objects. The spare tire is the object in 

question, and it is not currently in use. The difference between 

the spare tire and the car is that the spare tire is not part of the 

car's main structure and is not in contact with the ground, while 

the car is a functional vehicle with a complete structure and is in 

contact with the ground. 

Caption: The spare tire that is not used currently .Query: Girl on left no sleeves. 

Think: The thinking process involves 

identifying the object of interest, 

which is 'girl on left no sleeves'. The 

object is the person on the left side of 

the image, wearing a sleeveless 

denim vest and a necklace. The focus 

is on the person's upper body and the 

sleeveless vest. 

53 

Think: The image shows a group of 

people sitting on the grass, with some 

wearing distinctive clothing and 

a c c e s s o r i e s . T h e p e rs o n i n t h e 

foreground, wearing a black tank top 

with text on the back, appears to be 

133 

the "girl on left no sleeves". The tank top has a visible text that 

reads "WIR K ÖNNEN UNS NICHT EINRICHTEN DEN WIR SIND IM 

TEIL VON SUCH!". The task is to find the difference between 

objects and compare the most closely matched one. The objects 

in the image are the people, and the most closely matched object 

in this context is the person wearing the black tank top with the 

text. The answer should be in JSON format, with the bbox of the 

person and the points of the two largest inscribed circles inside 

the interested object. Caption: The girl on left no sleeves. 

Query: Girl kicking. 

Think: The thinking process involves 

identifying the object of interest, 

which is the girl kicking the soccer 

ball. I look for the person who is 

actively kicking the ball, which is the 

girl in the white jersey. The other 

players and the coach are not the 

focus. 

55 

Think: The image shows a group of 

children playing soccer on a grassy 

field. The focus is on a girl in a blue 

jersey who appears to be kicking a 

soccer ball. The other children are 

running, and there are adults in the 

128 

background. The girl in the blue jersey is the one kicking the ball, 

and the other children are running towards the ball. The objects 

in the image include the soccer ball, the children's soccer 

uniforms, the grassy field, and the adults in the background. The 

girl in the blue jersey is the one kicking the ball, and the other 

children are running towards the ball. The most closely matched 

object is the girl in the blue jersey, as she is the one actively 

kicking the ball. 

Caption: The girl in the white jersey kicking the soccer ball .

Query: In a baseball game, the 

pitcher throws the ball to the batter, 

who tries to hit it. what equipment 

does the batter use to hit the ball? 

Think: The thinking process involves 

identifying the object the batter uses 

to hit the ball. The object in question 

is the bat, which the batter holds and 

swings to hit the ball. The bat is the 

primary equipment used by the batter. 

41 

Think: The image shows a baseball 

game with a batter, a catcher, and an 

ump i re . T h e b atte r i s h o l d i n g a 

baseball bat, which is the equipment 

used to hit the ball. The thinking 

process involves identifying the object 

83 

that the batter uses to hit the ball, which is the baseball bat. The 

objects in the image are the batter, the baseball bat, the catcher, 

the umpire, and the baseball field. The baseball bat is the object 

that the batter uses to hit the ball. 

Caption: The bat used by the batter to 

hit the ball .Figure 6. Additional qualitative comparison. Masks: GT (green), DPAD (red), and baseline (purple). Query ：In the picture, there is a type of bird with a distinctive feature on the top of its head, which usually 

indicates its gender, what part in the picture might have this characteristic? 

<think> The image shows a close-up of a rooster, which is a type of bird. The 

distinctive feature on the top of its head is the comb, which is a red, fleshy structure. 

This comb is a characteristic feature of roosters and is used to indicate their gender. 

The rooster in the image has a red comb. The comb is located on the top of the rooster's 

head, above the beak and eyes. The rooster's comb is the part of the bird that has the 

distinctive feature, which is the red fleshy structure on the top of its head. 

</think><answer>{\"bbox\": [204, 21, 786, 258], \"points_1\": [289, 159], \"points_2\": 

[642, 225]}</answer><caption> the rooste r's red head </caption> IoU=0.40 

<think> The thinking process involves identifying the distinctive feature on the top of 

the bird's head, which is typically a comb and wattle in roosters. The comb is the red, 

fleshy structure on top of the bird's head, and the wattle is the hanging flap of skin 

below the beak. In the picture, the red, fleshy structure on top of the bird's head is the 

comb. </think><answer>{\"bbox\": [202, 19, 572, 250], \"points_1\": [330, 130], 

\"points_2\": [420, 200]}</answer><caption> the red comb on the top of the rooster 's 

head </caption> IoU=0.96 

Think Format=1 Seg Format=1 IoU=0 Bbox=0 Points=1 DPAD=0 Final=3 

Think Format=1 Seg Format=1 IoU=1 Bbox=1 Points=1 DPAD=1 Final=6 Figure 7. Qualitative demonstration of spatial-semantic alignment evolution via discriminative perception. 

## 6. Additional Qualitative Analysis 

It can be observed that models lacking the “Discrimina-tive Perception” reward often generate verbose and diver-gent reasoning chains, as detailed in Figure 6. Specifically, DPAD significantly reduces reasoning redundancy across the following three core dimensions: 

Pruning Divergent Global Scenes. In the baseline method, the model frequently allocates excessive attention to global background descriptions irrelevant to the query. For instance, in the “spare tire” and “girl kicking” exam-ples, the baseline model consumes a large number of to-kens describing the “vintage race car... parked on a grassy area,” “people in the background,” or “adults in the back-ground”. In contrast, DPAD, through the contrastive reward mechanism of anchored descriptions, effectively guides the model to disregard these divergent global details and an-chor its reasoning directly on the target object (e.g., clearly locating the uninflated spare tire on the side of the car). This achieves accurate segmentation using significantly fewer to-kens (e.g., reducing the count from 135 to 57). 

Filtering Irrelevant Objects and Over-identification. 

When multiple objects or complex semantics are present in a scene, the baseline model is highly prone to enumerative behavior or deviating from the core task. In the “baseball game” example, the baseline not only describes the batter but also redundantly lists the catcher, the umpire, and the baseball field. This is particularly evident in the “girl on left no sleeves” example, where the baseline diverges from the visual grounding objective to recognize and transcribe a large block of German text (“WIR K ¨ ONNEN UNS NICHT EINRICHTEN...”) on the person’s clothing. DPAD effec-tively filters out these distractors and precisely converges on the “bat” and the “sleeveless denim vest,” which not only reduces the token count by more than half but also substan-tially improves the mask IoU from 0.00 to high-precision levels (0.90 and 0.78, respectively). 

Reducing Over-reasoning and Self-confirmations. In the examples of the “dog’s paws” and “cat’s eyes,” the baseline exhibits a pronounced tendency toward “self-confirmation.” The model repeatedly restates the problem context and incorporates superfluous trivial details (such as repeatedly emphasizing that the cat’s “ears are perked up” and “pupils are dilated,” or that the dog “appears to be en-joying itself”). DPAD, on the other hand, presents a highly “Short & Focused” reasoning paradigm, addressing the core attributes of the target directly and concisely outputting the “lower legs and paws” or the “cat’s eyes.” These additional visualization results provide com-pelling evidence that, by incentivizing target-relevant de-scriptions, DPAD structurally prunes divergent scenes, ir-relevant objects, and uninformative self-confirmations. This not only substantially compresses the length of the reason-ing chains (mitigating the redundancy issues that degrade reasoning efficiency) but, more importantly, provides highly precise localization cues for downstream mask generation by eliminating contextual noise. 

## 7. Evolution of DPAD Alignment 

In the evolution analysis of the convergence process, we observe how the DPAD reward mechanism calibrates spa-tial outputs through differentiated feedback on intermediate states (as shown in Figure 7). During the under-converged stages of training, the model frequently exhibits a discon-nect between semantics and geometry. At this stage, if the model relies solely on visual priors to yield a coarse bounding box covering most of the rooster’s head, but gen-erates an over-generalized or inaccurate description (e.g., “the rooster’s red head”), our mechanism assigns a reward of R = 0 to suppress such blind localization lacking rig-orous logical support. When the model demonstrates cor-rect anatomical discrimination during its reasoning process (e.g., explicitly distinguishing between the “comb on top of the head” and the “wattle under the beak”) and gener-ates the precise description “the red comb on the top of the rooster’s head”, the mechanism provides positive feedback of R = 1 . Continuously driven by this mechanism, the model is able to correct the initially ambiguous boundaries, precisely contracting and locking the bounding box onto the comb region, raising the IoU to 0.96 .