Title: Streaming Real-Time Trajectory Prediction Using Endpoint-Aware Modeling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.01864v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 03:35:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Streaming Real-Time Trajectory Prediction Using Endpoint-Aware Modeling 

## Alexander Prutsch David Schinagl Horst Possegger Institute of Visual Computing, Graz University of Technology 

{alexander.prutsch, david.schinagl, possegger }@tugraz.at 

## Abstract 

Future trajectories of neighboring traffic agents have a sig-nificant influence on the path planning and decision-making of autonomous vehicles. While trajectory forecasting is a well-studied field, research mainly focuses on snapshot-based prediction, where each scenario is treated indepen-dently of its global temporal context. However, real-world autonomous driving systems need to operate in a continu-ous setting, requiring real-time processing of data streams with low latency and consistent predictions over successive timesteps. We leverage this continuous setting to propose a lightweight yet highly accurate streaming-based trajectory forecasting approach. We integrate valuable information from previous predictions with a novel endpoint-aware mod-eling scheme. Our temporal context propagation uses the trajectory endpoints of the previous forecasts as anchors to extract targeted scenario context encodings. Our approach efficiently guides its scene encoder to extract highly relevant context information without needing refinement iterations or segment-wise decoding. Our experiments highlight that our approach effectively relays information across consecutive timesteps. Unlike methods using multi-stage refinement pro-cessing, our approach significantly reduces inference latency, making it well-suited for real-world deployment. We achieve state-of-the-art streaming trajectory prediction results on the Argoverse 2 multi-agent and single-agent benchmarks, while requiring substantially fewer resources. Project Page. 

## 1. Introduction 

Trajectory prediction, i.e ., forecasting the future movements of nearby traffic participants, is a key component of the au-tonomy stack in self-driving vehicles. Trajectory prediction is essential for efficient and reliable navigation, as it enables autonomous vehicles to anticipate the behavior of surround-ing agents and plan maneuvers proactively in response to predicted motions. The latency of the trajectory prediction model directly contributes to the total delay between sen-sor observations and vehicle control actions as it is typically performed between the perception and motion planning mod-

Figure 1. Traffic scenes are constantly changing, which is often neglected in trajectory prediction methods operating on snapshots rather than in a continuous setting. For example, for the trajectory prediction of the turning process of the focal agent (green), a pos-sible interaction with a pedestrian (red) near the endpoint of the previous estimation (at time t−1) is important context that needs to be considered in the current prediction ( t). We model this temporal context propagation with a novel endpoint streaming mechanism, achieving accurate predictions at minimal latencies. 

ules. Thus, for practical deployment in autonomous vehicles, trajectory prediction models must produce highly accurate predictions with minimal latency. One of the key challenges in trajectory forecasting is identifying the most influential map elements and the most relevant neighboring agents for motion prediction, especially in complex scenarios with long prediction horizons, often exceeding 100 meters. While the initial agent position pro-vides a strong prior for relevant context elements, scene ele-ments along the future path play a crucial role, as illustrated in Figure 1. Recent trajectory prediction approaches com-monly use refinement schemes [ 28 , 42 , 43 ] to incorporate this knowledge: Initial coarse future trajectories are itera-tively refined to enhance prediction accuracy. For instance, SmartRefine [ 42 ] proposes an adaptive multi-stage refine-ment scheme with scene context re-encoding to improve pre-dictions of the strong baseline model QCNet [ 43 ]. Methods that use such refinement iterations achieve highly accurate re-sults on large-scale benchmarks like Argoverse 2 (AV2) [ 37 ]. However, they impose high computational cost and latency. 1

> arXiv:2603.01864v1 [cs.CV] 2 Mar 2026

This limits their applicability in real-world autonomous sys-tems, where fast and efficient decision-making is critical and methods with higher latency can lead to less reliable results due to outdated sensor observations. In addition, current research in trajectory prediction fo-cuses on processing and evaluating snapshots of individual scenarios in benchmark datasets [ 9, 37 ]. This snapshot-based treatment is in sharp contrast to the application in real au-tonomous vehicles, where trajectory prediction systems oper-ate in a continuous environment. In this real-world scenario, additional constraints must be considered. In particular, the consistency across successive predictions, which is essential for integration into downstream decision-making systems. On the other hand, continuous streaming-based processing also offers advantages, such as using contextual information across multiple prediction frames to improve the accuracy of future motion estimates. Recently, pioneering streaming-based approaches [ 24 , 30 ] have emerged, laying the foun-dation for addressing the challenges of continuous trajec-tory prediction. RealMotion [ 30 ] demonstrates that a simple backbone architecture combined with streaming mechanisms achieve promising results on the AV2 dataset [ 37 ]. However, their approach does not use all available temporal informa-tion to encode the scene context, for example by not taking into account past predictions. To advance towards consistent and efficient continu-ous real-world motion forecasting, we introduce a novel streaming-based trajectory prediction approach that uses temporal information for targeted scene context extrac-tion. In particular, we propose a s treaming endpoint- aware m odeling (SEAM) architecture to effectively incorporate information across consecutive frames. By leveraging pre-diction endpoints from the previous prediction frame as prior information, we directly integrate target region informa-tion into our modeling without requiring resource-intensive refinement iterations. In-depth evaluations on AV2 [ 37 ], both single and multi-agent benchmarks, show that our new streaming mechanism provides significant advantages over previously proposed streaming techniques [ 30 ]. We demonstrate that our approach outperforms more complex and resource-demanding models, while also addressing real-world considerations like reducing fluctuations across multi-ple predictions for the same agent. It combines high accuracy with minimal inference latency, achieving state-of-the-art results for streaming-based trajectory prediction on the AV2 benchmarks. In summary, our main contributions include: • We propose a new trajectory prediction model, effectively leveraging the consecutive nature of scenarios for target-centric context encoding without any refinement steps. • Despite achieving minimal inference latency, we demon-strate that our model outputs excellent results on complex trajectory prediction tasks and sets a new state-of-the-art in streaming processing on the AV2 multi-agent benchmark. • Our ablation study highlights the effectiveness of our endpoint-aware modeling in propagating information from the previous prediction timestep. 

## 2. Related Work 

Trajectory prediction methods typically take agent states and map information as input. Map data is predomi-nantly modeled as vectorized data [ 12 , 32 ] and encoded by PointNet-like architectures [ 26 ], while agent time series information is commonly processed by recurrent architec-tures [ 21 , 32 ], attention-based modules [ 4, 17 , 25 , 30 ] or state-space models [ 39 ]. To capture relationships between agents and map elements, recent methods utilize graph neu-ral networks [ 6, 12 , 16 , 18 , 31 , 38 ] or attention-based en-coders [ 4, 11 , 19 , 22 , 23 , 28 , 41 ]. Trajectory decoding is per-formed using either multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) [ 4, 30 ]or more advanced cross-attention-based designs [ 28 , 29 , 39 ]. 

2.1. Refinement Modules for Trajectory Prediction 

Iterative refinement is a common strategy in state-of-the-art trajectory prediction approaches [ 11 , 28 , 34 , 42 , 43 ]. Long-horizon benchmarks like Argoverse 2 [ 37 ] and WOMD [ 9 ]involve predictions spanning over 100 meters, resulting in a large number of scene context elements. While the initial agent position helps to identify the relevant context, detecting critical elements at long distances remains challenging based solely on the given past motion of the agent. To address this, multiple refinement steps can be applied to progressively extract scene context elements that have a strong influence on future agent behavior [ 28 , 42 ]. Initial predictions provide strong guidance for identifying key scene elements which can be used to iteratively refine the trajectory hypotheses. MTR [ 28 ] and its follow-up works [ 7 , 11 , 29 ] iteratively refine trajectory predictions, using dynamic intention queries for aggregating scene context during decoding. R-Pred [ 5]proposes a two-stage forecasting approach where initial pre-dictions define scene context tubes which are then utilized by a refinement network to generate improved predictions. QC-Net [ 43 ] employs a two-stage decoding process, where initial predictions are used as priors in a refinement stage by incor-porating them into the mode query of a cross-attention de-coder. Additionally, at each inference step, it divides future trajectory prediction into shorter temporal segments, which are predicted recurrently. SmartRefine [ 42 ] proposes an adaptive refinement iteration strategy, which is demonstrated for QCNet. At each inference step, an adaptive number of trajectory decoding iterations are performed to progressively refine predictions based on updated scene encoding. Re-cently, DeMo [ 39 ] introduces a decoupled query strategy, first modeling motion state consistency and multi-modal intents separately before decoding the final trajectory output. Overall, methods like DeMo [ 39 ] and SmartRefine [ 42 ]provide strong evidence that multi-stage decoding improves 2trajectory prediction quality. However, the gains in accuracy are often only small, especially considering the significantly higher computing costs required for executing a multi-stage refinement scheme at each prediction time step. This dimin-ishing return underscores the need for novel strategies to balance computational cost and accuracy, when designing trajectory prediction models for real-world applications. 

2.2. Streaming Trajectory Prediction 

Current trajectory prediction research primarily focuses on snapshot-based prediction, where individual scenarios are processed without considering global temporal context across evolving scenes. In practice, however, autonomous systems operate in a continuous environment and process data in a streaming manner, introducing additional require-ments like temporal consistency, as well as opportunities for improvement by leveraging additional temporal information. Pang et al . [ 24 ] present an early contribution to motion forecasting in continuous, streaming scenarios. Their predic-tive streamer extends snapshot-based trajectory prediction models with a custom occlusion reasoning module and a differentiable filter to enhance temporal consistency. Real-Motion [ 30 ] shows that incorporating context and predictions from previous frames enables accurate results even with a simple backbone [ 4 ]. They introduce a context stream ap-plying cross-attention on ego-motion-aligned context from current and previous frames, and a trajectory relay mech-anism that refines current predictions via offsets from em-bedded past predictions. DeMo [ 39 ] also integrates both mechanisms into their approach. HPNet [ 31 ] includes the exploration of a basic historical prediction attention module on the comparatively simple AV1 dataset [ 3]. QCNet [ 43 ]explores a key-value cache for past observations, touching on concepts related to streaming processing. However, it does not consider past predictions or ensure alignment across prediction steps, and its compute-intensive decoder poses significant challenges for real-time deployment. Overall, existing streaming-based methods incorporate mechanisms to maintain the consistency of successive predic-tions [ 24 , 30 ] and leverage the propagation of agent-centric scene context across timesteps [ 30 ] to address the continuous nature of real-world autonomous driving. However, they do not explore the use of the previously predicted trajectories as prior knowledge for context encoding. Given the impor-tance of these regions for extracting relevant contextual fea-tures [ 28 , 42 ], we propose an efficient strategy that includes this information in a single decoding step, thereby avoiding the high computational overhead of refinement modules. 

## 3 . Streaming Trajectory Prediction Using Endpoint-Aware Modeling 

We propose SEAM, an accurate yet lightweight trajectory prediction method based on a streaming-based processing paradigm. Unlike refinement-based approaches [ 28 , 42 ], which use multi-stage decoding to iteratively refine predic-tions by aggregating relevant scene context, SEAM intro-duces a novel mechanism that propagates predictions across timesteps to extract endpoint-centered target region features. This design enables SEAM to achieve high accuracy with low latency by avoiding the computational overhead of re-finement iterations. Furthermore, by leveraging past predic-tions to identify potential target regions, SEAM addresses a key limitation of prior streaming-based methods [ 24 , 30 ], which ignore this strong temporal prior. Our approach aligns well with the continuous nature of real-world autonomous driving: as future prediction timesteps unfold, interactions with other agents may evolve and must be dynamically con-sidered. For example, recall Figure 1: when predicting a turn, a potentially crossing pedestrian on the sidewalk must be considered. As illustrated in overview Figure 2, we lever-age past prediction endpoints to guide the model towards relevant regions, allowing us to achieve highly accurate fu-ture trajectories in a single decoding step, eliminating the need for computationally expensive refinement iterations. The core component of our approach is the streaming-based dual-region encoding mechanism that uses the end-points from past predictions to enhance scene context ag-gregation. In addition to conventional agent-centric context encoding, which is centered at the current position of the fo-cal agent, we introduce a second set of context features: We extract target-centric features by retrieving scene elements closely around the endpoints of the previously predicted tra-jectory as these regions are likely to have high relevance for the current frame’s prediction. We encode them using a shallow target encoder with the trajectory endpoints as coordinate system origins. During decoding, we execute attention to both agent-centric and target-centric features. We describe the baseline encoding in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. Next, we introduce our endpoint-aware modeling (EAM) ,which includes the novel target-centric feature encoding (Section 3.3) and its integration into the proposed dual-context decoder (Section 3.4). Section 3.5 outlines the inte-gration of baseline streaming mechanisms [ 30 ]. We present our extension to the multi-agent setting in Section 3.6. 

Input Representation: Trajectory prediction refers to forecasting future trajectories F given historical agent states 

A and lane data L. We follow the common input represen-tation of state-of-the-art work [ 4, 25 , 30 , 39 ] and initially sample all agents and map elements within a fixed radius around the focal agent. A tensor A ∈ RNa×Th×Da rep-resents the historical trajectories, where Na is the number of agents, Th represents the number of historical timesteps and Da the feature dimension of the motion states, i.e . po-sitions and velocity. Each lane is represented by sampling 

Pl points along its centerline. We define lane data as a ten-sor L ∈ RNl×Pl×Dl , where Nl denotes the number of lane 3Figure 2. Overview of our streaming-based trajectory prediction architecture SEAM. We assume that for frame t − 1 no previous prediction exists for our focal agent. Thus, only a standard trajectory prediction model pass is executed. In the next frame t, we incorporate the endpoints from the previous predictions to aggregate target-centric context information. We encode them using a second encoder path and provide it as additional input to our novel dual-context decoder. 

segments and Dl represents the feature dimension, i.e . the 

xy -coordinates of the centerline. To facilitate efficient encod-ing of historical movements and lane data, we first transform each element in a local coordinate system [ 4]. We normal-ize the historical trajectories w.r.t. their initial pose while coordinates of lane centerlines are given w.r.t. their center position. This enables the model to learn motion patterns and lane segment shapes independently of global positions. 

Output Representation: Our model predicts for a fo-cal agent the multi-modal future trajectory hypotheses 

F ∈ RK×Tf ×2, where Tf denotes the number of future timesteps and K the number of motion modes, along with associated probability scores P ∈ RK . We represent fu-ture trajectories in xy -coordinates. Thus, trajectory pre-diction can be formulated as (F, P ) = f (A, L ), where 

f is our trajectory prediction model. More specifically, our model consists of an encoder fE generating the scene con-text S = fE (A, L ) and a trajectory decoder fD using the scene context S ∈ RNa+Nl×D to predict trajectories F and probability scores P as (F, P ) = fD (S).

Streaming Processing: To align with real-world au-tonomous driving applications, we adopt a streaming pro-cessing scheme to predict the future trajectories at the current timestep t. We leverage previously encoded context informa-tion St−1 and past trajectory predictions F t−1 to generate highly accurate predictions and ensure temporally consistent trajectories. Consequently, our trajectory prediction at time 

t can be formulated as (F t, P t) = f (At, L t, S t−1, F t−1).

3.1. Agent and Lane Encoding 

We follow [ 17 , 25 ] to encode the historical agent movement by projecting the agent data At into the D-dimensional fea-ture space RNa×Th×D using a linear layer. Next, we apply multi-head self-attention [ 33 ] along the temporal dimension to capture the agent motion dynamics and use a pooling operation to aggregate temporal information. This yields an agent representation Ate ∈ RNa×D where the movement of each agent is encoded in a feature vector R1×D. To encode the lane data, we follow the default state-of-the-art approach [ 4, 25 , 28 – 30 , 39 ] of using a mini-PointNet-like [ 26 ] network. This results in a lane context representa-tion Lte ∈ RNl×D . Thus, our encoders fA and fL generate agent feature tokens Ate = fA(At) and lane feature tokens 

Lte = fL(Lt) for further encoding. 

3.2. Agent-Centric Context Encoding 

After encoding each scene context element individually, the relationships among all scene elements must be learned. To achieve this, we concatenate the agent Ate and lane Lte to-kens to form a scene context representation Ct ∈ RNc×D ,where Nc = Na + Nl. To incorporate categorical informa-tion, like different agent and lane types, we add learnable type embeddings [ 4] to the scene tokens. A common way for encoding relations among map elements and agents is self-attention across scene tokens [ 4, 17 , 25 , 39 , 42 ]. To this end, a global positional encoding must be established, which is commonly done using a focal agent-centric coordinate system. We encode the global poses using the position (x, y )

and the rotation yaw of each local token coordinate system, 4Figure 3. Architecture of our novel dual-context attention decoder, leveraging both agent-centric St and target-centric T t features. 

i.e . agent track origin and lane segment center. We apply a sine and cosine transformation to the yaw and process the pose information RNc×4 using a two-layer multilayer percep-tron (MLP). Following, we add the positional embeddings to our context tokens Ct ∈ RNc×D and apply multi-head attention in our scene encoder fS . This yields the encoded scene context St = fS (Ct) with St ∈ RNc×D .

3.3. Target-Centric Context Encoding 

The agent-centric encoding implicitly guides the model to fo-cus on the surroundings of the focal agent, where nearby con-text elements are highly relevant for predicting future motion. However, as highlighted in Figure 1, also the areas where the agent is heading to are highly important for accurate predic-tions. Since we operate in a streaming-based setting, each agent that was visible in the previous frame has multi-modal past trajectory predictions, denoted as F t−1 ∈ RK×Tf ×2.These previous predictions F t−1 provide a strong prior for scenario regions that are also crucial for context extraction. We use the endpoints of these trajectories as anchors to de-fine K target regions. Next, we gather tokens from our scene context Ct within a region-of-interest radius r around each target anchor, forming K individual target context token sets 

CtT ∈ RK×N ′ 

> c×D

. In practice, N ′ 

> c

is significantly smaller than Nc making our target encoding computationally less expensive than the main agent-centric encoding. Following the same process as for the agent-centric scene context S, we encode each target-centric context CtT individ-ually in our target encoder fT , obtaining T t ∈ RK×N ′ 

> c×D

.To capture the relationship between the global coordinate root and each target anchor coordinate frame, we also add positional embeddings for the transformation to the target anchor of each region (see our supplementary for details). 

3.4. Decoding with Dual-Context Attention 

Our decoder fD generates future trajectories F t and prob-ability scores P t based on the agent-centric scene context 

St and our novel target-centric scene context T t, formulated as (F t, P t) = fD (Q, S t, T t). We employ learnable queries 

Q ∈ RK×D to obtain multi-modal outputs and implement a DETR-like [ 2 ] decoding approach. Figure 3 illustrates the architecture of our dual-context attention decoder. We iteratively execute cross-attention d-times to our scene context S ∈ RNc×D , and the target-specific tokens 

T ∈ RK×N ′ 

> c×D

. Thus, information from both feature sets is available in each decoder stage and integrated into our final output. The agent-centric context S provides local information, while our target context T gives the model fine-grained information on long-horizon dependencies with other agents and map elements. Each mode query only at-tends to one associated set of target tokens T ∈ R1×N ′ 

> c×D

.Finally, we project the decoded queries Q′ to future trajecto-ries F t ∈ RK×Tf ×2 and probability scores P t ∈ RK using a dedicated two-layer MLP for each output. 

3.5. Context Referencing and Trajectory Relaying 

In addition to our novel endpoint-aware modeling, we lever-age context referencing and trajectory relaying [ 30 ] to model the streaming setting through information flow from the pre-vious frame t − 1. We follow the setup of [ 30 ] for both mechanisms to enable fair comparison: To account for focal agent motion between t−1 and t, we apply motion-aware layer normalization (MLN) [ 35 ] to the scene context St−1

before integrating it into the current encoding Ct via agent-to-scene and map-to-map cross-attention. Trajectory relay employs a cross-attention-based interaction module to refine the current predictions F t using past predictions F t−1.

3.6. Extension to Multi-Agent Settings 

To predict accurate trajectories for all agents Na in a scene, we first generate marginal predictions for each agent individ-ually. To this end, we treat each agent as focal agent once for our single-agent model, stack the input data and perform an inference pass with a batch size of Na. Next, we introduce a lightweight global consistency module, to fuse the marginal predictions to joint, globally consistent world predictions. Our consistency module takes the mode features 

Q′ ∈ RNa×K×D for each agent and their global positions 

R ∈ RNa×4 as input. A shallow MLP encodes the global positions into positional embeddings. We then apply self-attention across all modes per agent (over K) as well as self-attention across all agents per mode (over Na) to cap-ture intra- and inter-agent relationships. Following our single agent decoder design, we decode the final world trajectory predictions using two shallow MLPs. As output, we ob-tain Fw ∈ RK×Na×Tf ×2 world predictions with associated confidence scores Pw ∈ RK .

## 4. Experiments 

We present experimental results on the single-agent and multi-agent benchmarks of the Argoverse 2 (AV2) [ 37 ]dataset, along with a latency analysis for both settings to assess the practical applicability of our approach. Addition-ally, we provide an ablation study for our endpoint-aware modeling on both AV2 and Argoverse (AV1) [ 3], with further results included in the supplementary material. 5Method Streaming minADE 1 minFDE 1 MR 6 minADE 6 minFDE 6 brier-minFDE 6                                                                                                                          

> SIMPL [40] ✗2.03 5.50 0.19 0.72 1.43 2.05 HPTR [41] ✗1.84 4.61 0.19 0.73 1.43 2.03 Forecast-MAE [4] ✗1.74 4.36 0.17 0.71 1.39 2.03 MTR [28] ✗1.74 4.39 0.15 0.73 1.44 1.98 EMP-D [25] ✗1.75 4.35 0.17 0.71 1.37 1.98 GANet [34] ✗1.77 4.48 0.17 0.72 1.34 1.96 ProIn [8] ✗1.77 4.50 0.18 0.73 1.35 1.93 RealMotion [30] * ✓1.65 4.12 0.15 0.67 1.29 1.93 QCNet [43] ✗1.69 4.30 0.16 0.65 1.29 1.91 RealMotion [30] (Train/Val)* ✓1.59 3.93 0.15 0.66 1.24 1.89 Tamba [14] ✗1.66 4.24 0.17 0.64 1.24 1.89 ProphNet [36] ✗1.80 4.74 0.18 0.68 1.33 1.88 MTR++ [29] ✗1.64 4.12 0.14 0.71 1.37 1.88 DyMap [10] ✗---0.71 1.29 1.87 SmartRefine [42] ✗1.65 4.17 0.15 0.63 1.23 1.86 DeMo [39] ✓1.49 3.74 0.13 0.61 1.17 1.84
> SEAM (Ours) ✓1.60 3.95 0.15 0.66 1.24 1.84
> Table 1. Single-agent trajectory prediction results on the Argoverse 2 test set. For all metrics lower indicate better, table sorted in descending order by brier-minFDE 6. We report results for published works on the official leaderboard without model ensembling. The streaming approach of Pang et al . [ 24 ] is not included (their custom dataset prevents direct comparison). *For RealMotion [ 30 ] we report the results for their official checkpoint, as well as the results from their paper, which is trained on the train and validation set.

4.1. Experimental Settings 

Dataset: We evaluate our model on the Argov-erse 2 (AV2) [ 37 ] trajectory prediction dataset. It has a sam-pling rate of 10 Hz and contains 199,908 training, 24,988 val-idation, and 24,984 test scenarios collected in six U.S. cities. In each scenario the first 5 s serve as historical context and the goal is to predict the trajectories for the subsequent 6 s .The long historical context makes AV2 ideal for evaluation in streaming processing, as it allows a reasonable sliding-window processing (see below). In contrast, WOMD [ 9]provides only 1 s of history and nuScenes [ 1] offers 2 s but at only 2 Hz. Further reducing this few historical data points to multiple windows limits the agent encoder’s ability to learn motion patterns. Both are also not considered for streaming processing by related work [ 24 , 30 , 39 ]. We evaluate on the single-agent (predict trajectories for one agent per scenario) and multi-agent (predict globally consistent trajectories for multiple agents per scenario) benchmarks of AV2. Addition-ally, we provide an ablation study on Argoverse 1 (AV1) [ 3 ]which features 2 s history and considers a future of 3 s .

Metrics: We evaluate our approach using the standard AV2 [ 37 ] benchmark metrics. For the single-agent case, we use the miss rate (MR k), minimum average displace-ment error (minADE k), minimum final displacement error (minFDE k), and Brier minimum final displacement error (brier-minFDE k). Following the official leaderboard, we evaluate using the top k ∈ { 1, 6} scoring trajectories. For the multi-agent case we utilize the actorMR k, avgMinADE k,avgMinFDE k and avgBrierMinFDE k which account for the mean errors across all actors in each world. 

Streaming Processing: To enable streaming processing using existing benchmarks, we follow [ 30 , 39 ] by limiting the historical model input Th to a fraction of the available history. We then operate using a sliding window and conduct multiple model executions. In particular, for AV2 we use a historic input of h = 3 s and execute three predictions at t ∈{3, 4, 5}s. The final prediction is made at the same time point as in snapshot-based methods, allowing a fair comparison. We provide a detailed comparison of streaming and snapshot-based processing in our supplementary material. 

4.2. Argoverse 2 Single-Agent Results 

Table 1 shows the results for the Argoverse 2 single-agent test set. Our SEAM, along with DeMo [ 39 ], achieves the best score on the main metric (brier-minFDE 6), outperform-ing recent work like Tamba [ 14 ] and even more resource-intensive methods, such as QCNet [ 43 ] and SmartRefine [ 42 ]. This strong performance without any refinement iterations highlights the effectiveness of our endpoint-aware modeling. We also outperform RealMotion [ 30 ], a prior streaming-based prediction method, while also achieving lower in-ference latency (Sec. 4.4). DeMo [ 39 ] achieves slightly lower displacement errors since their decoupled decoding yields more diverse trajectories, but at a significantly higher latency (Sec. 4.4). The small gap between minFDE 6 to brier-minFDE 6 (induced by the main metric’s probability penalty) demonstrates our model’s strong confidence estima-tion, which is also crucial for downstream integration into the planning module. This highlights that directly integrating target-centric features helps assess maneuver likelihood. 6Method Streaming avgMinADE 1 avgMinFDE 1 actorMR 6 avgMinADE 6 avgMinFDE 6 avgBrierMinFDE 6                                                                                                         

> FJMP [27] ✗1.52 4.00 0.23 0.81 1.89 2.59 Forecast-MAE [4] ✗1.30 3.33 0.19 0.69 1.55 2.24 RealMotion [30] ✓1.14 2.97 0.18 0.62 1.32 2.01 DeMo [39] ✓1.12 2.78 0.16 0.58 1.24 1.93 SEAM (Ours) ✓1.05 2.57 0.16 0.62 1.21 1.85 QCNeXt [44] ✗1.03 2.55 0.14 0.54 1.13 1.79
> Table 2. Multi-agent trajectory prediction results on the Argoverse 2 test set. For all metrics lower values indicate better performance, table sorted in descending order by avgBrierMinFDE 6. For all methods we report results without model ensembling. Method Streaming Latency ( B= 1 )Latency ( B= 32 )Latency ( B= 64 )Model AV2 Test Set Offline Online Offline Online Offline Online Parameters brier-minFDE 6
> SmartRefine [42] ✗>118 ms* >680 ms* -8.0M 1.86 QCNet [43] ✗118 ms 680 ms -7.7M 1.91 RealMotion [30] ✓86 ms 24 ms 247 ms 88 ms 436 ms 150 ms 2.9M 1.93 DeMo [39] ✓139 ms 39 ms 275 ms 83 ms 466 ms 142 ms 5.9M 1.84
> SEAM (Ours) ✓91 ms 28 ms 140 ms 50 ms 246 ms 74 ms 4.6M 1.84
> Table 3. Latency analysis for predicting BArgoverse 2 scenarios in the single-agent setting using a NVIDIA V100 GPU. Online (for streaming-based methods) is the time required to process a single sliding window; Offline is the time required to process the full stream (to generate the benchmark predictions). For streaming methods the online latency is relevant for practical applications. *SmartRefine does not provide an implementation for AV2—since its main results add refinement iterations to QCNet, latency is higher than for QCNet.

4.3. Argoverse 2 Multi-Agent Results 

Previous methods, e.g . [ 14 , 42 ], often report only single-agent results. However, the multi-agent benchmark is more relevant for practical systems: models deployed in real-world settings must be capable to predict trajectories for more than one agent in a scene at the same time. The results in Ta-ble 2 show that, in this setting, our SEAM outperforms previous streaming-based methods [ 30 , 39 ] in the main met-rics. The current best-performing method is the snapshot method QCNeXt [ 44 ], an extension of QCNet [ 43 ]. How-ever, the displacement errors differ only by a few centimeters, whereas its extensive use of recurrence and refinement itera-tions in decoding poses significant challenges for real-time deployment. Since model latency directly impacts the delay between sensor observations and prediction output, models with computational overhead may lead to worse results in real-world scenarios due to delayed response. For reference, an agent traveling at 50 km/h covers approximately 0.7 min 50 ms. Thus, marginally lower displacement errors at increased processing delay offer no benefit in practice. 

4.4. Latency Analysis 

Argoverse 2 Single-Agent Setting: Table 3 compares la-tencies for predicting various batch sizes of AV2 single-agent scenarios. Our approach has favorable runtime compared to related work, especially since it scales well with larger batch sizes which are relevant in practice as the single-agent bench-mark evaluates only one agent per scenario. SEAM achieves minimal latency by using only a single decoder pass, un-like DeMo [ 39 ], QCNet [ 43 ] and SmartRefine [ 42 ], which employ multiple decoding stages. Additionally, it predicts the complete future trajectory without splitting it into seg-ments, as done in QCNet and SmartRefine. In comparison to RealMotion [ 30 ] our more efficient decoder design leads to a latency advantage. The fast processing speed makes our approach highly suitable for real-world deployment, as it combines streaming modeling with computational efficiency — two key considerations for practical use. 

Argoverse 2 Multi-Agent Setting: Related work on streaming-based processing (RealMotion [ 30 ] and DeMo [ 39 ]) does not provide details on their multi-agent implementations. Moreover, no official implementation is available for QCNeXt [ 44 ]. As a result, a direct latency comparison is not possible. However, based on the nature of the task, we can reasonably assume that per-scenario latency in a multi-agent setting exceeds the single-agent latencies reported in Table 3. For our model, we measure an average online latency of 38 ms per scenario in the multi-agent set-ting on the AV2 validation set using a single NVIDIA V100 GPU (batch size B = 1 ). Notably, this is even faster than the single-agent prediction latencies reported for DeMo and QCNet, highlighting the high efficiency of our approach. 

4.5. Ablation Studies 

Information Streaming Mechanisms: In Table 4 we compare our endpoint-aware modeling (EAM), which in-cludes the target-centric feature encoding and the dual-context decoder, to the context stream (CS) and trajectory relay (TR) streaming mechanisms introduced by previous work [ 30 ]. The top row in each group presents the results 7t=3s (minFDE-6: 5.385) t=4s (minFDE-6: 6.179) t=5s (minFDE-6: 0.712) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 12.173) t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 5.385) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 6.179) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 0.712) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 12 .173) t=3s (minFDE-6: 1.074) t=4s (minFDE-6: 2.640) t=5s (minFDE-6: 1.106) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 7.766)                 

> t= 3 s(minFDE 6:1.074) t= 4 s(minFDE 6:2.640) t= 5 s(minFDE 6:1.106) RealMotion [30] t= 5 s(minFDE 6:7.766)

Figure 4. Qualitative results on two Argoverse 2 scenarios. We show the predictions of our streaming-based method at t ∈ { 3, 4, 5}s. The visualizations also show ground truth future , agent histories , and neighboring agents . The right column shows the final predictions at 

t = 5 s for RealMotion [ 30 ] in the streaming-based setting. Top row: the focal agent is approaching an intersection where other traffic is currently passing by, making it difficult to identify possible movement. Bottom row: a pedestrian crosses the street at an intersection to the right. Our approach correctly predicts that the vehicle can either continue straight or turn right, either waiting before the crosswalk or proceeding directly if the pedestrian has already left the crosswalk.                                                         

> Dataset hStream CS+TR [30] EAM mADE 6mFDE 6b-mFDE 6
> 2s ✗✗✗0.64 1.04 1.67 AV1 1s ✓✓✗0.62 0.98 1.62 Val 1s ✓✗✓0.60 0.95 1.55 1s ✓✓✓0.59 0.93 1.52
> 5s ✗✗✗0.77 1.39 2.00 AV2 3s ✓✓✗0.75 1.29 1.93 Val 3s ✓✗✓0.70 1.27 1.88 3s ✓✓✓0.66 1.25 1.85

Table 4. Comparison of different information forwarding mecha-nisms for streaming trajectory prediction. We compare the integra-tion of context stream (CS) and trajectory relay (TR) introduced by [ 30 ] to our endpoint-aware modeling (EAM). The first line shows the traditional snapshot-based use. We highlight best values. 

of our backbone architecture operating in the traditional snapshot-based prediction setting without any streaming mechanism. Comparing streaming-based processing using CS and TR to our approach highlights the effectiveness of our EAM in propagating information from the previous frame. Our prediction endpoint-aware modeling achieves a larger improvement than the two streaming mechanisms proposed by [ 30 ]. Leveraging endpoint information in the streaming setting proves to be highly beneficial for enhancing trajec-tory prediction accuracy. Overall, combining our EAM with CS and TR leads to the best results. 

Target Context Radius: We evaluate the influence of dif-ferent target context radii r in Table 5. Performance saturates at a radius of 30 meters, as incorporating further context at larger radii does not provide relevant information for our endpoint-aware modeling. A larger radius increases the num-ber of target context tokens and thus latency, making a radius of 30 meters an optimal trade-off between performance and efficiency for practical applications. Notably, our approach remains effective even with a smaller radius of 10 meters, as injecting previous endpoint positions into the decoder already provides a strong prior. Incorporating the endpoint location during decoding also guides cross-attention toward                   

> Dataset rmADE 6mFDE 6b-mFDE 6
> 10m 0.68 1.27 1.89 AV2 15m 0.67 1.26 1.87 Val 30m 0.66 1.25 1.85
> 45m 0.66 1.25 1.85

Table 5. Comparison of different radii r to select context elements for our target-centric region. We highlight best values. 

agent-centric features, further underscoring the importance of endpoint information in streaming processing. 

4.6. Qualitative Results 

Figure 4 shows predictions for two AV2 validation set scenar-ios, illustrating the evolving nature of streaming processing at t ∈ { 3, 4, 5}s. To demonstrate the benefits of our endpoint-aware modeling against previous work on streaming trajec-tory prediction, we also show the output of RealMotion [ 30 ]at t = 5 s. Additional qualitative results, including failure cases, are available in the supplementary material. 

## 5. Conclusion 

We propose a novel endpoint-aware modeling for streaming-based trajectory prediction. Our dual-context approach en-ables us to effectively incorporate the continuously evolv-ing relevant scene context, eliminating the need for costly trajectory refinement iterations to achieve highly accurate predictions. We significantly outperform inference speed of highly iterative schemes [ 29 , 42 ] and previous streaming based methods [ 30 , 39 ] for practical scenario sizes, while achieving competitive results on the Argoverse 2 single-agent dataset and setting new state-of-the-art for streaming-based trajectory prediction on the multi-agent benchmark. 

Acknowledgments. This work was partially funded by Addsafety (923936), a COMET Project funded by BMIMI, BMWET as well as the co-financing federal province of Styria. The COMET pro-gramme is managed by the FFG. 

8References 

[1] Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush Krishnan, Yu Pan, Gian-carlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuScenes: A Multimodal Dataset for Autonomous Driving. In CVPR , 2020. 6 [2] Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-End Object Detection with Transformers. In ECCV , 2020. 5[3] Ming-Fang Chang, John Lambert, Patsorn Sangkloy, Jagjeet Singh, Slawomir Bak, Andrew Hartnett, De Wang, Peter Carr, Simon Lucey, Deva Ramanan, et al. Argoverse: 3D Tracking and Forecasting with Rich Maps. In CVPR , 2019. 3, 5, 6, 11 [4] Jie Cheng, Xiaodong Mei, and Ming Liu. Forecast-MAE: Self-supervised Pre-training for Motion Forecasting with Masked Autoencoders. In ICCV , 2023. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11, 12 [5] Sehwan Choi, Jungho Kim, Junyong Yun, and Jun Won Choi. R-Pred: Two-Stage Motion Prediction Via Tube-Query Attention-Based Trajectory Refinement. In ICCV , 2023. 2 [6] Alexander Cui, Sergio Casas, Kelvin Wong, Simon Suo, and Raquel Urtasun. GoRela: Go Relative for Viewpoint-Invariant Motion Forecasting. In ICRA , 2023. 2 [7] Tobias Demmler, Lennart Hartung, Andreas Tamke, Thao Dang, Alexander Hegai, Karsten Haug, and Lars Mikelsons. Dynamic Intent Queries for Motion Transformer-based Tra-jectory Prediction. In IEEE IV , 2025. 2 [8] Yinke Dong, Haifeng Yuan, Hongkun Liu, Wei Jing, Fangzhen Li, Hongmin Liu, and Bin Fan. ProIn: Learn-ing to Predict Trajectory Based on Progressive Interactions for Autonomous Driving. arXiv , 2024. 6 [9] Scott Ettinger, Shuyang Cheng, Benjamin Caine, Chenxi Liu, Hang Zhao, Sabeek Pradhan, Yuning Chai, Ben Sapp, Charles R Qi, Yin Zhou, et al. Large Scale Interactive Motion Forecasting for Autonomous Driving: The Waymo Open Motion Dataset. In ICCV , 2021. 2, 6 [10] Bin Fan, Haifeng Yuan, Yinke Dong, Zhengyu Zhu, and Hongmin Liu. Bidirectional Agent-Map Interaction Feature Learning Leveraged by Map-Related Tasks for Trajectory Prediction in Autonomous Driving. IEEE Trans. Automation Science and Eng. , 2025. 6 [11] Yiqian Gan, Hao Xiao, Yizhe Zhao, Ethan Zhang, Zhe Huang, Xin Ye, and Lingting Ge. MGTR: Multi-Granular Trans-former for Motion Prediction with LiDAR. In ICRA , 2024. 2, 11 [12] Jiyang Gao, Chen Sun, Hang Zhao, Yi Shen, Dragomir Anguelov, Congcong Li, and Cordelia Schmid. VectorNet: Encoding HD Maps and Agent Dynamics From Vectorized Representation. In CVPR , 2020. 2 [13] Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian Error Linear Units (GELUs). arXiv , 2016. 12 [14] Yizhou Huang, Yihua Cheng, and Kezhi Wang. Trajec-tory Mamba: Efficient Attention-Mamba Forecasting Model Based on Selective SSM. In CVPR , 2025. 6, 7 [15] Peter J Huber. Robust Estimation of a Location Parameter. 

The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 1964. 12 [16] Xiaosong Jia, Penghao Wu, Li Chen, Yu Liu, Hongyang Li, and Junchi Yan. HDGT: Heterogeneous Driving Graph Transformer for Multi-Agent Trajectory Prediction via Scene Encoding. IEEE TPAMI , 2023. 2 [17] Zhiqian Lan, Yuxuan Jiang, Yao Mu, Chen Chen, Shengbo Eben Li, Hang Zhao, and Keqiang Li. SEPT: To-wards Efficient Scene Representation Learning for Motion Prediction. In ICLR , 2023. 2, 4, 11 [18] Ming Liang, Bin Yang, Rui Hu, Yun Chen, Renjie Liao, Song Feng, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning Lane Graph Representa-tions for Motion Forecasting. In ECCV , 2020. 2 [19] Yicheng Liu, Jinghuai Zhang, Liangji Fang, Qinhong Jiang, and Bolei Zhou. Multimodal Motion Prediction with Stacked Transformers. CVPR , 2021. 2 [20] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. In ICLR , 2019. 13 [21] Jean Mercat, Thomas Gilles, Nicole El Zoghby, Guillaume Sandou, Dominique Beauvois, and Guillermo Pita Gil. Multi-Head Attention for Multi-Modal Joint Vehicle Motion Fore-casting. In ICRA , 2020. 2 [22] Nigamaa Nayakanti, Rami Al-Rfou, Aurick Zhou, Kratarth Goel, Khaled S Refaat, and Benjamin Sapp. Wayformer: Mo-tion Forecasting via Simple & Efficient Attention Networks. In ICRA , 2023. 2 [23] Jiquan Ngiam, Benjamin Caine, Vijay Vasudevan, Zheng-dong Zhang, Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Jeffrey Ling, Rebecca Roelofs, Alex Bewley, Chenxi Liu, Ashish Venugopal, et al. SceneTransformer: A Unified Architecture for Predicting Multiple Agent Trajectories. ICLR , 2022. 2 [24] Ziqi Pang, Deva Ramanan, Mengtian Li, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Streaming Motion Forecasting for Autonomous Driving. In 

IROS , 2023. 2, 3, 6, 15 [25] Alexander Prutsch, Horst Bischof, and Horst Possegger. Ef-ficient Motion Prediction: A Lightweight & Accurate Tra-jectory Prediction Model With Fast Training and Inference Speed. In IROS , 2024. 2, 3, 4, 6, 11 [26] Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. PointNet: Deep Learning on Point Sets for 3D Classification and Segmentation. In CVPR , 2017. 2, 4 [27] Luke Rowe, Martin Ethier, Eli-Henry Dykhne, and Krzysztof Czarnecki. FJMP: Factorized Joint Multi-Agent Motion Pre-diction over Learned Directed Acyclic Interaction Graphs. In 

CVPR , 2023. 7 [28] Shaoshuai Shi, Li Jiang, Dengxin Dai, and Bernt Schiele. Motion Transformer with Global Intention Localization and Local Movement Refinement. In NeurIPS , 2022. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 [29] Shaoshuai Shi, Li Jiang, Dengxin Dai, and Bernt Schiele. MTR++: Multi-Agent Motion Prediction With Symmetric Scene Modeling and Guided Intention Querying. IEEE TPAMI , 2024. 2, 6, 8 [30] Nan Song, Bozhou Zhang, Xiatian Zhu, and Li Zhang. Motion Forecasting in Continuous Driving. In NeurIPS , 2024. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 [31] Xiaolong Tang, Meina Kan, Shiguang Shan, Zhilong Ji, Jin-feng Bai, and Xilin Chen. HPNet: Dynamic Trajectory Fore-casting with Historical Prediction Attention. In CVPR , 2024. 2, 3 

9[32] Balakrishnan Varadarajan, Ahmed Hefny, Avikalp Srivas-tava, Khaled S Refaat, Nigamaa Nayakanti, Andre Cornman, Kan Chen, Bertrand Douillard, Chi Pang Lam, Dragomir Anguelov, et al. MultiPath++: Efficient Information Fusion and Trajectory Aggregation for Behavior Prediction. In ICRA ,2022. 2 [33] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need. In NeurIPS , 2017. 4 [34] Mingkun Wang, Xinge Zhu, Changqian Yu, Wei Li, Yuexin Ma, Ruochun Jin, Xiaoguang Ren, Dongchun Ren, Mingxu Wang, and Wenjing Yang. GANet: Goal Area Network for Motion Forecasting. In ICRA , 2023. 2, 6 [35] Shihao Wang, Yingfei Liu, Tiancai Wang, Ying Li, and Xi-angyu Zhang. Exploring Object-Centric Temporal Modeling for Efficient Multi-View 3D Object Detection. In CVPR , 2023. 5[36] Xishun Wang, Tong Su, Fang Da, and Xiaodong Yang. ProphNet: Efficient Agent-Centric Motion Forecasting with Anchor-Informed Proposals. In CVPR , 2023. 6 [37] Benjamin Wilson, William Qi, Tanmay Agarwal, John Lam-bert, Jagjeet Singh, Siddhesh Khandelwal, Bowen Pan, Rat-nesh Kumar, Andrew Hartnett, Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes, Deva Ramanan, Peter Carr, and James Hays. Argoverse 2: Next Generation Datasets for Self-driving Perception and Forecasting. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks , 2021. 1, 2, 5, 6, 11, 13, 14 [38] Wenyuan Zeng, Ming Liang, Renjie Liao, and Raquel Urtasun. LaneRCNN: Distributed Representations for Graph-Centric Motion Forecasting. In IROS , 2021. 2 [39] Bozhou Zhang, Nan Song, and Li Zhang. DeMo: Decoupling Motion Forecasting into Directional Intentions and Dynamic States. In NeurIPS , 2024. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15 [40] Lu Zhang, Peiliang Li, Sikang Liu, and Shaojie Shen. SIMPL: A Simple and Efficient Multi-agent Motion Prediction Base-line for Autonomous Driving. RAL , 2024. 6 [41] Zhejun Zhang, Alexander Liniger, Christos Sakaridis, Fisher Yu, and Luc Van Gool. Real-Time Motion Prediction via Heterogeneous Polyline Transformer with Relative Pose En-coding. In NeurIPS , 2023. 2, 6 [42] Yang Zhou, Hao Shao, Letian Wang, Steven L. Waslan-der, Hongsheng Li, and Yu Liu. SmartRefine: A Scenario-Adaptive Refinement Framework for Efficient Motion Predic-tion. In CVPR , 2024. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 [43] Zikang Zhou, Jianping Wang, Yung-Hui Li, and Yu-Kai Huang. Query-Centric Trajectory Prediction. In CVPR , 2023. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 13 [44] Zikang Zhou, Zihao Wen, Jianping Wang, Yung-Hui Li, and Yu-Kai Huang. QCNeXt: A Next-Generation Framework For Joint Multi-Agent Trajectory Prediction. arXiv , 2023. 7 

10 Streaming Real-Time Trajectory Prediction Using Endpoint-Aware Modeling 

# Supplementary Material 

In this supplementary, we first present a comparison of our streaming processing to traditional snapshot-based meth-ods in Section A. To support reproducibility, in the follow-ing, we provide all implementation details of our model (Section B) and how to apply it to the multi-agent setting (Section C). We further detail the evaluations (Section D), present additional results, such as a robustness study on re-covering early prediction errors, and provide visualizations of our approach (Section E). Finally, we provide an overview of the code framework (Section F) which is also included as supplemental material. 

## A. Streaming vs. Snapshot-based Processing 

Figure 5 compares the standard snapshot-based trajectory prediction paradigm to the streaming-based processing em-ployed by us and related work [ 30 , 39 ]. Both paradigms use the same scenario splits to separate training and validation data, ensuring a fair comparison. To enable streaming pro-cessing without longer context data, the historical input fed into the model is reduced. This allows multiple predictions to be executed within the same set of training data. The streaming-based processing closely reflects real-world deployment scenarios, where trajectory prediction models operate in a continuous setting. It enables an in-formation flow between successive prediction steps, unlike the snapshot-based paradigm, where each prediction is per-formed independently. This allows models to leverage tem-poral information, leading to more robust and consistent forecasting. For Argoverse 2 [ 37 ] we set the model input history to 

h = 3 s , which corresponds to Th = 30 input samples and we execute three predictions with a 1 s time gap in between at t ∈ { 3, 4, 5} s. Following the benchmark settings, we predict a future of 6 s which corresponds to Tf = 60 out-put time steps. To fully leverage the available training data during streaming processing, we also predict for Ta = 20 

additional steps into the future. This leads to a total model output of 8 s seconds. For all evaluations and also for select-ing our endpoint-centric features only the future up to Tf

steps is relevant. During the first and second model pass, the additional future steps Ta allow us to compute the regres-sion losses on a longer future horizon, effectively teaching the model to predict long-term future. For our ablation on Argoverse 1 [ 3] we use a historic input of 1 s (Th = 10 ) and execute three passes at t ∈ { 1, 1.5, 2} s. 

> Figure 5. Comparison between snapshot-based and streaming-based trajectory prediction paradigms. Both approaches operate on the same benchmark input data, ensuring a fair comparison without additional data. In the streaming paradigm, past observations are processed using a sliding window, closely resembling practical deployment conditions. To model the challenges of real-world op-eration information relay mechanisms are established in streaming processing. This enables more consistent and temporally coherent predictions compared to snapshot-based processing, which handles each frame independently. In this example, predictions from the third pass of the streaming model can be directly evaluated against those from the snapshot-based approach.

## B. Implementation Details 

We set the feature dimension of our model to D = 128 . Our categorical type embeddings distinguish between four agent types (vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists, and others) and three lane types (standard lanes, bike lanes and bus lanes). We use the standard radius of 150 meters to collect scene elements [ 4,25 , 30 , 39 ]. To maintain a manageable number of scene tokens, we do not split the lanes into smaller segments as 

e.g . suggested by [ 11 , 17 ]. We use the xy -positions, xy -velocities and a corresponding valid flag to encode agent data, leading to Da = 5 . To encode the lane data, we use the 

xy -positions of each lane point and a valid flag to mask parts of lane segments exceeding the region of interest, leading to 

Dl = 3 .

B.1. Positional Embeddings 

To model the global poses of all elements — agents, lanes, and target-centric coordinate systems — we represent each using its position (x, y ) and rotation yaw . For agents, we use their initial position and orientation; for lanes, we use the center point and orientation of the centerline; and for target-centric coordinate systems, we use the trajectory endpoint 11 Figure 6. Modeling of target-centric coordinate system (orange) using the prediction (green) from the previous time frame. We also show the target context radius (orange) and the positional embedding (blue) used to model the relationship to the agent-centric origin (black). 

and compute the orientation based on the curvature at the trajectory’s end. 

B.2. Target-Centric Coordinate Systems 

Figure 6 illustrates the setup of our target-centric coordi-nate systems. We use the endpoint from trajectory predic-tion F t−1 at the previous time step to create a local ref-erence frame centered and oriented around the target re-gion. All scene features within the target context radius are then encoded w.r.t. the target coordinate system. To cap-ture global spatial relationships, we additionally incorporate positional embeddings from the agent-centric origin to the target-centric frame (blue dashed line). 

B.3. Multi-Head Attention Blocks 

For our multi-head attention blocks we use the following configuration: • Number of attention heads: 8 • Dropout rate: 0.2 • Feedforward expansion factor: 4 · D

• Activation function: GELU [13] • Norm before attention operation 

B.4. Encoder 

We utilize four encoder blocks in the agent encoder fA and four encoding blocks in our scene context encoder fS . For our target context encoder fT we utilize two encoder blocks. Table 6 provides an ablation study for the depth of our novel target context encoder. Since the number of tokens N ′ 

> c

in our                 

> Dataset # Blocks mADE 6mFDE 6b-mFDE 6
> 10.66 1.26 1.86 AV2 Val 20.66 1.25 1.85
> 30.66 1.26 1.85
> Table 6. Ablation study for different number of attention blocks in our target encoder fT.

target-centric context is smaller than the number of tokens 

Nc in the agent-centric context, a shallower encoder can be used. To compute the position embeddings for a given pose 

(x, y, θ ) we first transform it to (x, y, sin θ, cos θ). Then, we apply a two-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP): • Layer 1: 4 × D

• GELU [13] activation function • Layer 2: D × D

B.5. Decoder 

Our dual-context decoder consists of three stages ( d = 3 ), resulting in a total of six cross-attention blocks. If an agent has no previous prediction, the cross-attention step to the target-centric context is skipped. The MLP to process the decoded queries Q′ and output future trajectories F has two layers: • Layer 1: D × 2 · D

• ReLU activation function • Layer 2: 2 · D × 2 · (Tf + Ta)

Similarly, the MLP for outputting probability scores P :• Layer 1: D × 2 · D

• ReLU activation function • Layer 2: 2 · D × 1

As described above (Section A), our decoder predicts Ta

additional steps in addition to the Tf steps which are used as actual trajectories in the evaluation. 

B.6. Optimization 

We employ a common winner-takes-all strategy for training our model [ 4 ], where only the best fitting predicted trajectory (i.e . with the smallest average displacement error) is used for optimization. We utilize a smooth L1 loss (Huber loss [ 15 ]) as regression loss Lreg to ensure that the hypothesis fits to the ground truth. Additionally, we use a standard cross-entropy loss Lcls to assign the highest confidence score to the best-fitting trajectory. To further enhance learning, we employ an auxiliary loss Laux [ 4], where a single trajectory is predicted for each non-focal agent present in the scene, and a smooth L1 loss is applied. To predict the auxiliary future, we utilize a linear layer D×2·Tf for each token in our scene context S

that corresponds to an agent excluding the focal agent. The final loss is given as L = Lreg + Lcls + Laux .We train our model for 80 epochs, with the first 13 epochs serving as warm-up phase, during which the we linearly increase the learning rate from 1e-5 to 1e-2. Afterward, 12 we decrease the learning rate to 1e-5 using a single cosine annealing schedule. Training is executed using a batch size of 32 on a single NVIDIA Quadro RTX 8000. We utilize AdamW [ 20 ] as optimizer, employ norm-based gradient clipping with maximum value set to 5 and execute weight decay with 1e-2. We only train on the Argoverse 2 training set without any pre-training or data augmentations. 

## C. Multi-Agent Extension 

C.1. Implementation Details 

In the AV2 multi-agent settings the goal is to predict tra-jectories for all scored agents. Our global consistency module employs two transformer blocks for self-attention across all modes of an agent, followed by two transformer blocks for self-attention across agents per mode (world). In the first stage, we do self-attention on our decoded 

Q′ ∈ RNa,s ×K×D across all modes K for each agent, where 

Na,s is the number of scored agents. Next, we permute the queries to RK×Na,s ×D and perform self-attention across all agents Na,s per mode. To better model different agent behavior, we add categorical type embeddings to Q′, dis-tinguishing between focal-agents, scored -agents which are driving and scored -agents that are likely to be parked (based on the marginal predictions). We generate the world predic-tions Fw ∈ RK×Na,s ×Tf ×2 using a two-layer MLP: • Layer 1: D × 2 · D

• ReLU activation function • Layer 2: 2 · D × 2 · Tf

Similarly, the MLP for outputting the associated confidence scores Pw ∈ RK :• Layer 1: D × 2 · D

• ReLU activation function • Layer 2: 2 · D × 1

We use the same streaming-processing setup as in the single-agent setting. 

C.2. Optimization 

To adapt our approach to the multi-agent setting in Argov-erse 2 (AV2) [ 37 ], we initialize the model weights using our single-agent model (marginal prediction model). We then jointly train the marginal prediction model and the global consistency module end-to-end on the AV2 multi-agent train-ing set for 35 epochs, without any warm-up phase. To reduce memory consumption, we freeze the agent and lane encoders. During training, we apply a cosine annealing schedule to decay the learning rate from 1e-2 to 1e-5. Again, we employ a winner-takes-all principle by opti-mizing only the trajectories of the best world (lowest average minimum displacement error). Following single-agent train-ing, we use a regression loss Lreg for each agent prediction in the best world and employ a cross-entropy classification loss Lcls to assign the highest confidence score to the best-fitting world. To retain strong single-agent performance and guide multi-agent learning, we also include the single-agent losses Lmarginal (see above) during training on the multi-agent setting. The final loss is given as L = Lreg + Lcls + Lmarginal .

## D. Evaluation Details 

D.1. Metrics 

We evaluate our approach using the standard AV2 benchmark metrics. Each metric is evaluated using the top k scoring trajectory hypotheses. The minimum average displacement error (minADE k) is the mean Euclidean distance between the ground truth and the best-fitting hypotheses across all time steps. The minimum final displacement error (minFDE k)considers only the distance at the final time step, while the Brier minimum final displacement error (brier-minFDE k)adds a penalty term (1 − π)2 to the minFDE k, where π is the probability score for the best-fitting trajectory. The miss rate (MR k) evaluates whether any predicted endpoint is within a radius of 2 meters from the ground truth endpoint. In the multi-agent setting, we evaluate all metrics for the top k scoring worlds. Each world contains one future trajectory for each scored agent. The average minimum av-erage displacement error (avgMinADE k) is computed by averaging the minADE k across all actors within a world. Analogously, the average minimum final displacement er-ror (avgMinFDE k) considers the minFDE k for all actors, and the average brier minimum final displacement error (avgBrierMinFDE k) averages the brier-minFDE k across all actors in a world. The actor miss rate actorMR k denotes the rate of all scored agents which have an endpoint within 2 meters around the ground truth endpoint. 

D.2. Latency Measurements 

We utilize the official code implementations to measure the latencies of QCNet 1 [43 ], RealMotion 2 [ 30 ], and DeMo 3 [39 ]. To ensure fair comparison and eliminate influ-ences by different data loading and preprocessing implemen-tations, we measure only the inference latency of the model forward pass. 

## E. Additional Results 

E.1. Streaming Methods on AV2 Validation Set 

Table 7 compares streaming-based trajectory prediction ap-proaches on the Argoverse 2 validation set. Our approach again yields the best brier-minFDE 6, which considers both displacement errors and trajectory scoring. By comparing the brier-minFDE 6 to minFDE 6 values of the different mod-els, we can assess that our approach excels in estimating the 

> 1https://github.com/ZikangZhou/QCNet
> 2https://github.com/fudan-zvg/RealMotion
> 3https://github.com/fudan-zvg/DeMo

13 Method minADE 1 minFDE 1 MR 6 minADE 6 minFDE 6 brier-minFDE 6                  

> RealMotion [30] 1.65 4.10 0.16 0.67 1.30 1.94 DeMo [39] 1.48 3.73 0.13 0.61 1.19 1.86 SEAM (Ours) 1.60 3.96 0.15 0.66 1.25 1.85

Table 7. Comparison of streaming-based methods for single-agent trajectory prediction on the Argoverse 2 validation set. For all models we report results without model ensembling.                                  

> Endpoint Noise mADE 6mFDE 6b-mFDE 6
> N(0 ,5) 0.67 1.28 1.88
> U(−5,5) 0.67 1.27 1.87
> N(0 ,3) 0.67 1.26 1.87
> U(−3,3) 0.67 1.26 1.86
> N(0 ,1) 0.67 1.25 1.85
> U(−1,1) 0.67 1.25 1.85
> None 0.66 1.25 1.85

Table 8. Robustness of our endpoint-aware modeling on the AV2 [ 37 ] validation set by perturbing the prediction endpoints at t ∈ { 3, 4} s. These endpoints, which define the anchors for extracting our target-centric features, are modified using additive uniform noise ( U) or Gaussian noise ( N ). The shown results corre-spond to the prediction errors at t = 5 s. 

likelihood of predicted trajectories, which is important for interpreting the results in downstream tasks like ego-motion planning. 

E.2. Robustness to Error Propagation 

Table 8 evaluates the robustness of our endpoint-aware mod-eling for information streaming when previous predictions are noisy. To this end, we perturb the endpoint anchors, which are used to obtain our target-centric features, with uni-form or Gaussian noise. The results show that performance only slightly deteriorates under small prediction noise. Nev-ertheless, our dual-context approach maintains robust perfor-mance even when past predictions are affected by errors. The target-centric features provide additional information that improves overall prediction accuracy without constraining predictions, allowing recovery when agent-centric features at the current timestep indicate a different future movement. As the noise magnitude increases, performance declines further; however, the model remains resilient even under substantial noise offsets. Furthermore, we analyze the evolution of errors in Fig-ure 7. The plots compare the minFDE 6 for the first pre-diction, made at t = 3 s into the scenario, with the final prediction at t = 5 s, each evaluated over a future horizon of 6 s. The results show that our dual-context decoding ap-proach can recover from early prediction errors: even when the initial prediction is inaccurate (high value on the x-axis), the final prediction can still be highly accurate (low value on the y-axis). There are also some cases where the initial prediction is accurate but the final prediction degrades, for example when an unexpected maneuver, e.g . a sudden stop, is not apparent in the first prediction window but becomes relevant in the second. Overall, the model achieves improved prediction quality over time, as reflected by the higher point density below the x = y diagonal. 0 5 10 15 20 25            

> minFDE 6Initial Prediction at t= 3s
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> minFDE 6 Final Prediction at  t = 5s 012345
> minFDE 6Initial Prediction at t= 3s
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> minFDE 6 Final Prediction at  t = 5s

Figure 7. Density plots of prediction errors. Both plots compare the first prediction done at t = 3 s (x-axis) versus the final prediction done at at t = 5 s (y-axis). The top plot shows that even when the initial error is large, the model can recover and correct its prediction. The bottom plot provides a zoomed-in view near the origin. The higher density of points below the x = y diagonal (dashed line) indicates that predictions generally improve over time. 

14 Method Latency ( B = 1 ) Latency ( B = 32 ) Latency ( B = 64 )Offline Online Offline Online Offline Online RealMotion [30] 51 ms 13 ms 255 ms 85 ms 512 ms 172 ms DeMo [39] 73 ms 18 ms 223 ms 71 ms 433 ms 143 ms SEAM (Ours) 50 ms 13 ms 95 ms 39 ms 185 ms 65 ms 

Table 9. Latency analysis for predicting B Argoverse 2 single-agent scenarios using one NVIDIA A10 GPU. We compare streaming-based methods and report the offline and online inference latency. The online latency is relevant for practical application.                               

> Model Training Data Global Consistency Module actorMR 6avgMinADE 6avgMinFDE 6avgBrierMinFDE 6
> RealMotion [30] Single-Agent Data ✗0.727 1.413 4.060 4.716 SEAM (Ours) Single-Agent Data ✗0.693 1.324 3.643 4.256 SEAM (Ours) Finetuned on Multi-Agent Data ✗0.228 0.720 1.619 2.126 SEAM (Ours) Finetuned on Multi-Agent Data ✓0.155 0.600 1.180 1.814

Table 10. Ablation study on adapting single-agent methods to the AV2 multi-agent validation set. The first two rows show that, without any model adaptations or finetuning, both our approach and related work [ 30 ] perform poorly in the multi-agent setting. Finetuning on the multi-agent dataset significantly improves performance, and incorporating a global consistency module for scene-level scoring yields the best results.    

> Method Fluctuation RealMotion [30] 0.347 SEAM (Ours) 0.341

Table 11. We compare the trajectory fluctuation of our model to RealMotion [ 30 ]. The fluctuation metric defined by [ 24 ] gives an indication on the consistency of trajectories across multiple timesteps. 

E.3. Latency on NVIDIA A10 GPU 

We provide additional latency results using one NVIDIA A10 GPU, comparing streaming-based methods in Table 9. Also on this newer GPU architecture our approach achieves the best latency results, obtaining the lowest online and offline latency across all batch sizes. 

E.4. Multi-Agent Ablation Study 

We present an ablation study on extending single-agent ap-proaches to the multi-agent setting in Table 10. The first two rows show that naively applying a single-agent model to the multi-agent benchmark yields poor performance. This is primarily because the multi-agent dataset contains motion patterns that are not well-represented in the single-agent data. Moreover, these approaches ignore global consistency across agent predictions. Without a dedicated global consistency module, we generate multiple plausible future worlds by combining the most likely trajectories of each agent into one world, the second most likely into another, and so on. Fine-tuning the model on multi-agent data helps capture a broader range of behaviors (row 3), and incorporating an explicit global consistency module further improves performance, achieving the best results (row 4). 

E.5. Trajectory Fluctuation 

Table 11 compares the trajectory fluctuation of our approach with that of RealMotion [ 30 ]. The fluctuation metric, as de-fined by [ 24 ] measures the consistency of trajectories across multiple prediction frames. Our approach achieves a lower fluctuation score than RealMotion, indicating more consis-tent predictions. 

E.6. Result Visualizations 

We present additional qualitative results on scenarios from the Argoverse 2 validation set in Figure 8 and Figure 9. 

E.7. Failure Cases 

We present failure cases, where our approach fails to cor-rectly predict future trajectories in Figure 10. Commonly, failures are introduced by agent movements which cannot be anticipated at the prediction time, often also due to inade-quate map data, i.e . missing modeling of driveways. 

## F. Code Implementation 

For better clarity and to facilitate reproducibility, we also pro-vide our code implementation. The accompanying ReadMe 

file outlines how to setup a working environment and execute training, validation and visualization for the single-agent task. The codebase also includes all implementations for the multi-agent setting (files marked with ma prefix or suffix). We will release the source code and pretrained models upon paper acceptance. Our code is based on the implementation of RealMotion 2.15 t=3s (minFDE-6: 5.726) t=4s (minFDE-6: 3.364) t=5s (minFDE-6: 0.696) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 8.493) t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 5.726) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 3.364) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 0.696) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 8.493) t=3s (minFDE-6: 4.217) t=4s (minFDE-6: 5.570) t=5s (minFDE-6: 0.346) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 8.433) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 4.217) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 5.570) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 0.346) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 8.433) t=3s (minFDE-6: 8.892) t=4s (minFDE-6: 10.720) t=5s (minFDE-6: 1.282) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 12.970) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 8.892) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 10 .720) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 1.282) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 12 .970) t=3s (minFDE-6: 2.967) t=4s (minFDE-6: 3.846) t=5s (minFDE-6: 1.472) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 15.728) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 2.967) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 3.846) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 1.472) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 15 .728) t=3s (minFDE-6: 9.055) t=4s (minFDE-6: 1.975) t=5s (minFDE-6: 1.426) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 15.101) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 9.055) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 1.975) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 1.426) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 15 .101) t=3s (minFDE-6: 3.209) t=4s (minFDE-6: 1.493) t=5s (minFDE-6: 0.392) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 5.857) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 3.209) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 1.493) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 0.392) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 5.857) 

Figure 8. Qualitative results of our approach on scenarios from the Argoverse 2 validation set. We show the predictions of our streaming-based method at t ∈ { 3, 4, 5}s. The visualizations also show ground truth future , agent histories , and neighboring agents . The right column shows the final predictions at t = 5 s for using RealMotion [30] in the streaming setting. 

16 t=3s (minFDE-6: 1.598) t=4s (minFDE-6: 3.394) t=5s (minFDE-6: 0.520) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 12.441) t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 1.598) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 3.394) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 0.520) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 12 .441) t=3s (minFDE-6: 2.850) t=4s (minFDE-6: 2.744) t=5s (minFDE-6: 0.565) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 6.537) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 2.850) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 2.744) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 0.565) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 6.537) t=3s (minFDE-6: 0.163) t=4s (minFDE-6: 2.195) t=5s (minFDE-6: 0.852) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 7.440) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 0.163) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 2.195) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 0.852) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 7.440) t=3s (minFDE-6: 4.797) t=4s (minFDE-6: 2.993) t=5s (minFDE-6: 1.258) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 7.488) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 4.797) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 2.993) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 1.258) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 7.488) t=3s (minFDE-6: 0.890) t=4s (minFDE-6: 12.819) t=5s (minFDE-6: 0.339) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 5.784) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 0.890) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 12 .819) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 0.339) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 5.784) t=3s (minFDE-6: 5.707) t=4s (minFDE-6: 4.406) t=5s (minFDE-6: 1.073) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 7.145) 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 5.707) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 4.406) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 1.073) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 7.145) 

Figure 9. Qualitative results of our approach on scenarios from the Argoverse 2 validation set. We show the predictions of our streaming-based method at t ∈ { 3, 4, 5}s. The visualizations also show ground truth future , agent histories , and neighboring agents . The right column shows the final predictions at t = 5 s for using RealMotion [30] in the streaming setting. 

17 t=3s (minFDE-6: 8.496) t=4s (minFDE-6: 9.334) t=5s (minFDE-6: 8.099) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 17.275) Unexpected stop 

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 8.496) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 9.334) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 8.099) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 17 .275) t=3s (minFDE-6: 13.885) t=4s (minFDE-6: 42.219) t=5s (minFDE-6: 23.635) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 28.528) 

> Unexpected stop

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 13 .885) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 42 .219) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 23 .635) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 28 .528) t=3s (minFDE-6: 3.056) t=4s (minFDE-6: 4.626) t=5s (minFDE-6: 3.820) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 14.917) 

> Driveway inadequately mapped

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 3.056) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 4.626) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 3.820) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 14 .917) t=3s (minFDE-6: 6.668) t=4s (minFDE-6: 5.386) t=5s (minFDE-6: 9.425) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 18.545) 

> Waiting at intersection

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 6.668) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 5.386) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 9.425) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 18 .545) t=3s (minFDE-6: 2.039) t=4s (minFDE-6: 4.273) t=5s (minFDE-6: 18.062) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 23.061) 

> Waiting at intersection

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 2.039) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 4.273) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 18 .062) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 23 .061) t=3s (minFDE-6: 9.323) t=4s (minFDE-6: 1.412) t=5s (minFDE-6: 12.761) RealMotion t=5s (minFDE-6: 20.985) 

> Waiting at intersection

t = 3 s (minFDE 6: 9.323) t = 4 s (minFDE 6: 1.412) t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 12 .761) RealMotion [30] t = 5 s (minFDE 6: 20 .985) 

Figure 10. Failure cases of our approach on scenarios from the Argoverse 2 validation set. We show the predictions of our streaming-based method at t ∈ { 3, 4, 5}s. The visualizations also show ground truth future , agent histories , and neighboring agents . The right column shows the final predictions at t = 5 s for using RealMotion [30] in the streaming setting. In the first scenario, a vehicle stops before an intersection that is fairly far away for a currently unknown reason. In the second scenario, a vehicle stops for a reason that is not detected at the moment. In the third scenario, the vehicle begins turning into a driveway that is not modeled in the lane data. The fourth, fifth, and sixth scenarios depict vehicles waiting at an intersection where their future path is unclear. 

18