Title: SkillVLA: Tackling Combinatorial Diversity in Dual-Arm Manipulation via Skill Reuse

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.03836v1

Published Time: Thu, 05 Mar 2026 01:43:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# SkillVLA: Tackling Combinatorial Diversity in Dual-Arm Manipulation via Skill Reuse 

Xuanran Zhai ∗1, Zekai Huang ∗1, Longyan Wu ∗3,6, Qianyou Zhao 5, Qiaojun Yu 4, Jieji Ren 5,Ce Hao †1,2, and Harold Soh 1,71National University of Singapore, 2Beijing Zhongguancun Academy, 3Shanghai Innovation Institute, 

4Shanghai AI Laboratory, 5Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 6Fudan University, 7Smart Systems Institute, NUS 

∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: cehao@u.nus.edu Identify & Learn 

Skills Dataset 

SkillVLA 

Unseen Tasks     

> Lift bag (L)
> Lift bag (R)
> Shake cup (L)
> Shake cup (R)
> Smash mug
> Put cake in box
> Stir cup
> Zero -Shot Recompose
> Recompose by Few -Shot Adaption
> Lift bag (dual)
> Smash cup Stir box Stir mug
> Put cake in cup Smash box Put cake in mug
> Shake cup (dual)

Reuse     

> Stir Cake Smash
> Cup Box
> High -Level
> VLM
> Low -Level VLM
> (Left)
> Low -Level VLM
> (Right)
> Action
> Expert (L)
> Action
> Expert (R)
> Mug Shake (L) Shake (R)
> Lift (L) Lift (R)

Fig. 1: SkillVLA extracts single-arm skills from training data with hierarchical reasoning and skill-adaptive learning, being able to recompose them into unseen combinations during test time. 

Abstract —Recent progress in vision–language–action (VLA) models has demonstrated strong potential for dual-arm ma-nipulation, enabling complex behaviors and generalization to unseen environments. However, mainstream bimanual VLA for-mulations largely overlook the critical challenge of combinatorial diversity . Different pairings of single-arm behaviors can induce qualitatively distinct task behaviors, yet existing models do not explicitly account for this structure. We argue that effective bimanual VLAs should support skill reuse—the ability to recom-bine previously learned single-arm skills across novel left–right pairings—thereby avoiding the need to separately learn every possible combination. Current VLA designs entangle skills across arms, preventing such recomposition and limiting scalability. To address this limitation, we propose SkillVLA, a framework explicitly designed to enable skill reuse in dual-arm manipulation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SkillVLA substantially improves skill composition, increasing overall success rate from 

0% to 51% , and achieves strong performance on cooperative and long-horizon tasks. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Bimanual manipulation expands a robot’s effective workspace and enables concurrent, coordinated actions, sup-porting a wider range of tasks than single-arm systems [38, 52, 45, 13, 11, 25]. In this context, recent vision–language–action (VLA) models [7, 23, 29, 40, 39, 42] have shown impressive performance on bimanual manipulation; by jointly predicting both arms’ actions (e.g., via a concatenated action vector) with large-capacity architectures, VLA methods can represent complex coordinated behaviors. Further, by leveraging vision– language pretraining of VLM models, recent bimanual VLAs have shown the ability to generalize to novel scenes and instructions [23, 14, 22, 4, 6, 3, 7, 26]. Despite recent progress, learning generalist bimanual poli-cies remains challenging, as dual-arm control introduces richer behaviors patterns. Specifically, real-world bimanual behaviors exhibit pronounced combinatorial diversity . As shown in Fig. 1, many dual-arm tasks can be viewed as composi-tions of single-arm behaviors, and different pairings of left-and right-arm skills induce different bimanual tasks. As the underlying skill set grows, the number of possible pairings increases quadratically, resulting in an overwhelming number of combinations corresponding to different tasks. Current VLA formulations largely overlook combinatorial diversity. Predicting both arms via action concatenation requires the model to learn the joint distribution of left- and right-arm distributions. While this design is simple and captures tight coordination, it confines outputs to action pairings observed in demonstrations. As a result, the policy has limited combina-torial generalization and cannot form new bimanual behaviors by recombining single-arm skills, which makes them unable to address combinatorial diversity. We refer to this limitation as skill entanglement and analyze it in detail in Sec. IV-C. 

> arXiv:2603.03836v1 [cs.RO] 4 Mar 2026

To address the combinatorial diversity, a model must be able to effectively reuse robot skills learned from given demonstra-tions in a more flexible and thorough way. We name this ability as skill reuse . Concretely, instead of mechanically treating every bimanual behavior as indivisible dual-arm primitive, an ideal model should automatically uncover the latent skill structure within demonstrations and perform reasoning at the skill level. For bimanual behaviors that are essentially composition of single-arm skills, the model should reuse the discovered skills across different left–right combinations and compose them to form novel pairings that are not explicitly observed during training. We view such flexible reuse as a key foundation for broad generalization in bimanual settings, and provide a more formal definition and discussion in Sec. IV. We propose SkillVLA to enable skill reuse and address combinatorial diversity. Unlike conventional VLAs relying on monolithic dual-arm reasoning throughout, SkillVLA automat-ically identifies skill structures from demonstrations and per-forms skill-adaptive action generation. Concretely, for single-arm skills, it can retrieve and invoke them as independent units for recomposition or further adaptation. For behaviors that require collaboration, the model instead captures inter-arm dependence. SkillVLA achieves this with a two-level reasoning architecture. A shared high-level VLM, equipped with a collaboration estimator, captures global task intent and makes skill decisions. At the lower level, the policy follows the high-level instruction and switches between operation modes: it performs per-arm reasoning and action generation for single-arm skills, while allowing these two streams to be entangled by communication when cooperative behavior is deemed necessary by the high-level reasoning. Through skill-adaptive generation and per-arm reasoning, SkillVLA further exploits the VLM’s capability by extending reasoning to a finer semantic granularity, leading to stronger generalization. We conduct real-robot experiments on 20 manipulation tasks and two long-horizon multi-stage tasks to validate SkillVLA’s skill reuse and generalization ability. First, to evaluate if models are able to tackle combinatorial diversity, we test them on unseen tasks composed by learned skills, where strong bimanual VLA baselines achieve near-zero success due to skill entanglement. SkillVLA raises the success rate to 

51 %, demonstrating a decisive improvement in combinatorial generalization. Second, to confirm that our method does not sacrifice inter-arm cooperation, we evaluate on three highly-cooperative tasks, where SkillVLA matches the performance of the baselines, showing that its adaptive communication remains expressive for close coordination. Third, we study two multi-stage long-horizon tasks that interleave collaborative and independent phases. While SkillVLA correctly identifies cooperation level required and, further, completes the tasks faster by recomposing skills to parallelize the two arms when possible, reducing execution time by 21 %. Finally, we conduct a continual-learning study to show that skill reuse also benefits long-term skill learning: SkillVLA can effectively reuse exist-ing behaviors for acquiring new skills, achieving significantly better performances under limited demonstrations. In summary, this paper makes three main contributions:  

> •

We identify the skill entanglement issue in current VLAs and formulate the bimanual skill reuse problem.  

> •

We propose SkillVLA, which enables flexible skill reuse to tackle combinatorial diversity.  

> •

We validate SkillVLA on a real dual-arm robot, demon-strating combinatorial generalization ability via skill reuse, while maintaining strong performance on cooper-ative and long-horizon tasks. II. R ELATED WORK 

Dual-arm manipulation has long been a central topic in robotics. Early work largely focused on methods specialized for particular task families, such as assembly [47, 49, 18, 50], cloth folding [31, 5, 44, 35, 8, 1, 12], and bagging [10, 2, 9]. To improve adaptability, subsequent efforts introduced platforms with richer actuation, including dexterous end-effectors [41, 37, 15] and mobile bases [46, 17]. More recently, motivated by the goal of generalist bimanual policies, several works have scaled training data by learning from human demonstration videos [52, 19, 33]. Generalist bimanual policies, however, remained limited until the emergence of VLA models [16, 43, 29, 39, 53, 51, 7] accelerated progress in this direction. These approaches typically train end-to-end imitation learning policies on top of pretrained vision–language models. Benefiting from large model capacity and large-scale training on diverse robot datasets [32, 24, 36, 27, 48], they have shown improved environmental generalization, including better robustness to complex or unseen scenes. Nonetheless, generalization across diverse tasks remains challenging. Building on this line of work, we propose SkillVLA to improve action-level general-ization. III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

We consider a bimanual robot with left and right manipu-lators. At each time step, the robot receives an input x ∈ X 

(usually observation, instruction and robot state) and produces actions aL ∈ A L and aR ∈ A R; we write a = ( aL, a R). We are given a dataset of demonstrations D = {(xi, a iL, a iR)}I

> i=1

,where each tuple is a state–action sample extracted from expert trajectories. We assume these expert actions are generated by executing skills drawn from an underlying skill set 

S = Spair ∪ SD , S pair = {(smL , s mR )}Mm=1 , S D = {snD }Nn=1 

where SL and SR are the single-arm skill sets for the left and right arm ( Def. 1), and SD is a set of genuinely dual-arm (bimanual) skills ( Def. 2). Here Spair collects the paired 

single-arm skills that actually appear in the demonstrations. Our goal is to learn a bimanual policy πθ (aL, a R | x) that is able to effectively reuse these learned skills ( Def. 3), which we view as a key factor for resolving combinatorial diversity building generalist bimanual manipulation policies. IV. S KILL REUSE IN DUAL -A RM MANIPULATION 

In this section, we first give specific definitions of skills and skill reuse (Sec. IV-A), then we analyze what is required to solve this problem: for skill reuse to be possible, the model must (i) select suitable skills for any given scene x (Sec. IV-B), and (ii) generate correct actions for the selected skill (or skill pair). The latter motivates explicitly distinguishing between single-arm and dual-arm skills during training and execution, which current VLA-based methods do not support (Sec. IV-C). 

A. Definitions 

To formulate and analyze skill reuse in a general bimanual setting, we first define what we mean by a skill . We distinguish between single-arm skills , which can be executed by one arm in isolation, and dual-arm skills , which require coordinated behavior between the two arms. 

Definition 1 (Single-Arm Skills). For κ ∈ { L, R }, Sκ is the set of all possible left/right arm skills. A single-arm skill 

sκ ∈ Sκ is a conditional distribution πsκ (aκ | x). For any pair 

(sL, s R) ∈ SL × SR, their composition is defined as 

πsL,s R (aL, a R | x) = πsL (aL | x) πsR (aR | x).

Definition 2 (Dual-Arm Skills). A dual-arm skill sD ∈ SD

is a joint conditional distribution πsD (aL, a R | x) such that the conditional mutual information IπsD (aL; aR | x) > 0.Equivalently, πsD (aL, a R | x)̸ = πsL (aL | x) πsR (aR | x) for any single-arm skills sL, s R.Achieving inter-arm coordination for dual-arm skills re-quires an information pathway that induces dependence be-tween aL and aR. We denote this pathway conceptually by an inter-arm message m, yielding action generation forms such as πL(aL | x, Y L, m L) and πR(aR | x, Y R, m R). In practice, inter-arm message may be realized in various ways, such as explicit message passing, or implicitly through shared parameters as in common monolithic policies. For any possible scene x, we assume there exists a (possibly multi-valued) set of correct skills S⋆(x) ⊆ (SL × SR) ∪ SD

that are appropriate for that scene. We decompose this set as 

S⋆(x) = S⋆

> pair

(x) ∪ S⋆D (x), where 

S⋆

> pair

(x) = S⋆(x) ∩ (SL × SR), S⋆D (x) = S⋆(x) ∩ SD ,

corresponding to correct skills that can be expressed as a composition of single-arm skills and correct skills that are genuinely dual-arm. Note that S⋆

> pair

(x) is defined over the full product SL ×SR, and is not restricted to the paired set Spair ; in particular, it may contain recombinations of single-arm skills that never co-occur in the demonstrations. 

Definition 3 (Skill Reuse). For a bimanual policy learned from skill set S = Spair ∪ SD = {(smL , s mR )} ∪ { snD }, we define its possible behavior set as Sp = ( {smL } × { smR }) ∪ { snD }. We say that the policy exhibits skill reuse if, for every scene x

(possibly unseen) with S⋆(x) ∩ Sp̸ = ∅, there exists a skill 

s ∈ S⋆(x) ∩ Sp such that πθ (aL, a R | x) ≈ πs(aL, a R | x).Equivalently, this requirement decomposes into two ma-jor subproblems: (i) single-arm composition : if the correct behavior for x is a composition of single-arm skills, i.e. 

S⋆(x) ∩ Sp = {(SiL, S jR)} for some i, j , the policy must be able to realize this composition, even for (siL, s jR) that never appeared in Spair ; and (ii) dual-arm reproduction : when the correct skill is genuinely dual-arm, i.e. S⋆(x) ∩ Sp = {siD }

for some i, the policy should also produce action for siD

while maintaining its inter-arm coordination structure. For cases where multiple skill choices are valid, specifically, the model should then select and produce one of them. 

Remark (Fast bimanual continual learning by skill reuse). In practice, many dual-arm skills are close to simple compositions of two single-arm skills, in the sense that each arm largely follows a independent per-arm behavior under the same context x. The challenge is the coordination be-tween the two arms: the joint action distribution deviates from an independent product due to inter-arm coupling (cf. 

I(aL; aR | x) > 0 in Def. 2). Therefore, if a model can flexibly invoke reusable single-arm skills, acquiring a new bimanual skill can often be done with minimal finetuning by mainly learning additional information for coupling on top of the existing per-arm skills, rather than relearning both arms from scratch. Therefore, effective skill reuse can improve efficiency in continual learning or large-scale learning. 

B. Skill Selector 

Given a library of skills, action generation can be viewed as first selecting which skill (or skill pair) to use for a given scene 

x, and then sampling actions from the corresponding skill distributions. We assume a (finite) skill library consisting of indexed single-arm skills {skL}k∈KL ⊆ SL and {slR}l∈KR ⊆

SR, and indexed dual-arm skills {sdD }d∈KD ⊆ SD . We introduce a discrete skill index random variable 

Y ∈ Y := KD ∪ (KL × KR),

where Y = d ∈ KD means that the dual-arm skill 

πsD (aL, a R | x) should be used, and Y = ( k, l ) ∈ KL × KR

means that the single-arm skills πskL (aL | x) and πslR (aR | x)

should be used concurrently. An ideal high-level selector defines a distribution p⋆(Y | x),and the resulting action distribution is the mixture 

π⋆(aL, a R | x) = X

> d∈KD

p⋆(Y = d | x) πsD (aL, a R | x)+ X

> (k,l )∈KL×KR

p⋆(Y = ( k, l ) | x) πskL (aL | x) πslR (aR | x).

We use the term skill selector for this conceptual mechanism, without assuming a specific module or architecture. Ideally, the skill selector should select appropriate skills not only for scenes seen in the demonstrations, but also for novel inputs where the correct skill configuration has never been observed. 

C. Skill Entanglement in Current VLAs 

VLAs are often built upon a pretrained VLM, which pro-vides strong generalization over visual scenes and natural-language instructions. Typically, a VLA has a additional action module (or “action expert”) to generate actions. In bimanual manipulation, the action is commonly represented as a single vector by concatenating the left- and right-arm actions. The VLM is a natural candidate to implement a generaliz-able skill selector —i.e., to map a scene x to an appropriate skill index Y (or an equivalent decision variable) that can generalize beyond the demonstrated scenes. However, even if the upstream skill decision is sufficiently able to separate scenes requiring different skills, can the downstream action generation mechanism reuse skills in the sense of Sec. IV-A? We argue that common VLA designs exhibit two forms of 

skill entanglement that hinder effective skill reuse: 

Action Entanglement. Many bimanual VLA policies are trained to predict a single concatenated joint action vector 

(aL, a R). This monolithic supervision couples the two arms at the output level and encourages the model to fit the empirical joint distribution induced by paired demonstrations. Consequently, the learned policy may internalize dataset-specific cross-arm correlations rather than isolating reusable single-arm structure. This becomes problematic for skill reuse and recomposition. Even if the upstream vision–language reasoning can distinguish scenes requiring different skills, the downstream action generator may fail to (i) disentangle single-arm skills from dual-arm coordination patterns and (ii) sup-port recomposition of single-arm skills beyond the left–right pairings observed during training. In other words, joint-action learning can bias the model toward reproducing demonstrated bimanual patterns, limiting its ability to generalize to unseen combinations of per-arm behaviors. 

Latent entanglement in action-expert VLAs. As previously mentioned, recent VLA methods augment a pretrained VLM with a dedicated action-generation module (e.g., π0/π0.5 [7, 23], RDT2 [40], DexVLA [42]). Abstractly, a VLM encodes context x into a representation z, and an action module predicts bimanual actions conditioned on z,

p(aL, a R | x) = 

Z

p(aL, a R | z) p(z | x) dz, 

where p(z | x) is induced by the VLM backbone and 

p(aL, a R | z) is implemented by the action expert. While this architecture can be effective in practice, it introduces an additional pathway for skill entanglement. In bimanual imitation, the shared latent z learned from paired demonstrations may implicitly encode cross-arm dependen-cies. This latent entanglement can degrade skill recomposition when the policy is evaluated on unseen left–right pairings, since the action expert conditions both arms on a representa-tion that already mixes information across arms. V. M ETHOD : S KILL VLA In this section, we present SkillVLA , a method designed to enable effective skill reuse to address combinatorial di-versity and accelerate the acquisition of new skills. We first describe the overall architecture, which realizes skill reuse via a two-level reasoning pipeline and a collaboration estimator for behavior-type identification. We then introduce additional training strategies that help the model better capture skill structure and infer the degree of inter-arm cooperation. 

A. Method Pipeline 

Our method (overview in Fig. 2) follows the common VLA paradigm, with a top-level VLM and actions generated via an iterative flow-matching process [28, 30]. In our implementa-tion, we use the pretrained PaliGemma [6] backbone released with π0.5 [23] for initiating the VLMs. Our method consists of two main functional components, described below: 

Two-level reasoning (skill selection and action genera-tion). Because an explicit skill library is typically unavailable in practice, we aim for the model to discover and instantiate 

skill representations that support both learning and reuse. Skills can be represented in many forms; in SkillVLA we use natural language as the skill descriptor, which aligns naturally with the VLM backbone. We implement this choice via a two-level reasoning pipeline. As shown in Fig. 2, the high-level module explicitly pro-duces per-arm sub-prompts that act as skill descriptors. Con-cretely, we prompt the VLM to generate two texts (uL, u R)

in a fixed format: 

(uL, u R) ∼ p(uL, u R | x),

where uL and uR describe what the left and right arms should do, respectively (e.g., “pick the cake on the right” vs. “pick the box on the left”). This representation targets task intent and 

explicitly decouples per-arm skill selection, enabling flexible single-arm recomposition: novel combinations can be formed by pairing previously generated (or learned) uL and uR in new scenes. During low-level skill learning, we freeze the high-level VLM to preserve its vision–language generalization while training the action components. At the low level, per-arm actions are generated by two separate streams. Each stream uses its own low-level VLM (fine-tuned separately, e.g., via LoRA [20]) to process the visual input and the corresponding per-arm prompt, produc-ing a per-arm latent representation zi = fi(x, u i), where 

i ∈ { L, R }. Action experts then predict actions conditioned on the corresponding latent and the arm state. To support coordinated bimanual behaviors when needed, we introduce an adaptive cross-attention mechanism between the action experts to capture inter-arm dependence: 

ai ∼ p(ai | zi, α m i) ,

where mi is the inter-arm message produced by cross-attention. The cooperation level signal α gates this message to enable skill-adaptive action generation and is further elab-orated upon below. 

Cooperation estimator (behavior mode identifica-tion). While inter-arm communication is useful for capturing low-level dependence, it should be selectively enabled; for single-arm skills, the two arms should remain largely disentangled during both training and evaluation. To this end, we introduce a cooperation estimator that attends to High -Level VLM 

𝑧 𝐻 = 𝑓 𝐻 (𝑥 )

𝑢 𝐿 , 𝑢 𝑅 ∼ 𝑝 (𝑢 𝐿 , 𝑢 𝑅 ∣ 𝑥 )                      

> Low -Level VLM
> 𝑧 𝐿 =𝑓 𝐿 (𝑥 ,𝑢 𝐿 )
> Low -Level VLM
> 𝑧 𝑅 =𝑓 𝑅 (𝑥 ,𝑢 𝑅 )
> Action Expert
> 𝑎 𝐿 ∼𝑝 (𝑎 𝐿 ∣𝑧 𝐿 ,𝛼 𝑚 𝐿 )
> Action Expert
> 𝑎 𝑅 ∼𝑝 (𝑎 𝑅 ∣𝑧 𝑅 ,𝛼 𝑚 𝑅 )
> Coop. Estimator
> 𝛼 ∼𝑝 (𝛼 ∣𝑧 𝐻 )
> ViT ViT ViT
> Attend to
> Adaptive
> Cross Attn.

# SkillVLA 

𝜶 

> “Pick the left tube”

𝑢 𝐿 

> “Pick the right tube”

𝑢 𝑅      

> 𝑢 𝑅 ViT ViT ViT
> ViT ViT ViT
> “… decompose task
> into subtasks …”
> “Transfer
> tubes …”
> 𝑢 𝐿

Fig. 2: SkillVLA framework. SkillVLA adopts a two-level reasoning pipeline, where the high-level VLM generates separate subtasks for arms and low-level VLMs further process the prompts to instruct action generation. Inter-arm cross-attention enables cooperative behaviors generation, controlled by a collaboration estimator that identifies the operation mode required. 

the high-level VLM representation and predicts a scalar 

α ∈ [0 , 1] , indicating the degree of inter-arm cooperation (larger α implies stronger coupling). Formally, the estimator predicts 

α ∼ p(α | zH ), zH = fH (x),

where zH is the latent representation produced by the frozen high-level VLM. This signal serves as a mode identifier, indicating whether the current behavior is better explained as (i) a composition of single-arm skills or (ii) a cooperative dual-arm skill. We gate inter-arm message passing by α,enabling the policy to interpolate between per-arm generation and coupled dual-arm generation. To train αt, we use a simple communication usefulness 

objective derived from behavioral cloning (BC). At timestep 

t, the BC loss is 

LBC = ∥ˆaLt − aLt ∥22 + ∥ˆaRt − aRt ∥22.

We compute Lon BC with cross-attention enabled and Loff BC with cross-attention disabled. We then define 

Lcoop = λ ·



Lon BC − L off BC 



> sg

· αt,

where (·)sg denotes stop-gradient. Minimizing Lcoop increases 

αt when communication reduces the BC error and decreases 

αt otherwise. 

B. Additional Cooperation-Level Learning 

Because α directly gates cross-arm interaction, accurately inferring the cooperation level is critical. We introduce addi-tional mechanisms to encourage reliable cooperation estima-tion, which we use by default in our implementation. 

Priors and regularizers for cooperation learning. VLMs are pretrained on datastes and thus encode broad task seman-tics and commonsense regularities (e.g., when two arms are typically required). This makes them a natural source of priors for estimating task-dependent cooperation. To distill this in-formation into a lightweight estimator, we use an off-the-shelf VLM to produce a prior coordination strength αvlm ∈ [0 , 1] 

for the current scene and task (or αvlm ∈ { 0, 1} when using a discrete gate). Let ˜αt denote the gate value actually used for communica-tion (i.e., the continuous αt, or the soft discrete probability ˆyt

defined below). We regularize ˜αt toward the VLM prior and further encourage (a) sticky gating for temporal smoothness and (b) conservative communication, keeping the gate small unless interaction is beneficial: 

Lprior = ℓ(˜ αt, α vlm ),

Lsticky = ℓ(˜ αt, ˜αt−1), Lsup = ˜ αt.

We set ℓ(u, v ) = ∥u − v∥22 when ˜αt is continuous, and use a Bernoulli cross-entropy ℓ(u, v ) = −v log u−(1 −v) log(1 −u)

when ˜αt ∈ (0 , 1) is interpreted as a probability. 

Cooperation level discretization. In practice, a continuous gate αt can exhibit small but persistent fluctuations that desta-bilize action generation. To improve stability, we (optionally) discretize the gate by restricting αt ∈ { 0, 1}. Specifically, the model predicts ˆyt ∈ (0 , 1) , the probability of enabling cross-arm communication, and we train it with a binary cross-entropy loss: 

Ldisc = BCE( yt, ˆyt), yt = ILon BC < Loff BC 

 .

At inference time, we binarize ˆyt to obtain ˆαt ∈ { 0, 1}, which directly enables or disables the cross-attention message. We apply the same priors and regularizers from Sec. V-B to ˆyt

as a soft relaxation, thereby shaping the resulting discrete gate. This tokenized formulation simplifies gate prediction and empirically improved stability in preliminary experiments. Implementation and training details are provided in appendix. VI. E XPERIMENTS 

In this section, we evaluate our model’s ability to (i) freely reuse learned single-arm skills, (ii) capture the inter-arm coordination required by truly cooperative behaviors, and (iii) identify when cooperation is necessary for a given state. Our experiments are designed to answer the following questions: 1) Can SkillVLA flexibly recompose learned skills and generalize to unseen combinations of single-arm skills? 2) Is SkillVLA’s communication mechanism sufficient to support tight inter-arm coordination and reproduce co-operative dual-arm skills? Left  Right  Cake  

> Cup
> Box
> Mug
> Stir Smash

(A) 

> Stir
> Smash
> Cake Cup
> Box
> Mug

(B) Fig. 3: Skill recomposition tasks. (A): The models are trained on demonstrations of three skills for each arm. (B): After the models have learned the skills, zero-shot tests are conducted for every possible combinations of left and right-arm skills. 

TABLE I: Success Rates on Skill Recomposition Tasks ↑                                                  

> Methods Recomposition Tasks Cup ×Cake Cup ×Stir Cup ×Smash Box ×Cake Box ×Stir Box ×Smash Mug ×Cake Mug ×Stir Mug ×Smash Avg.
> π0.50.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
> π0-FAST 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 TwinVLA 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.04 SkillVLA 0.7 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.3 0.6 0.51

TABLE II: Success Rates on Skills Learned                                    

> Methods Skills Learned Cup Box Mug Cake Stir Smash Avg.
> π0.50.7 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.6 0.7 0.77
> π0-FAST 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.5 0.4 0.70 TwinVLA 0.7 0.8 0.5 0.8 0.5 0.7 0.67 SkillVLA 0.8 0.7 0.8 1.0 0.6 0.8 0.78

3) Can SkillVLA handle multi-stage, long-horizon tasks by estimating cooperation level and switching between operating modes? 4) In continual learning, does SkillVLA better leverage previously learned skills to acquire related new skills compared to existing methods? 

Baselines and evaluation metrics. We compare SkillVLA against π0.5 [23], a representative state-of-the-art VLA base-line. For Q1, we additionally include π0-FAST [34] as a repre-sentative autoregressive VLA, which represents the other ma-jor paradigm beyond diffusion-based VLAs and tests whether skill entanglement persists across architectures. In the Q1 setting, these general-purpose VLAs achieve near-zero success due to severe skill entanglement. To enable more informative comparisons, we further include TwinVLA [21] as a factorized baseline that composes two single-arm VLAs by sharing action experts while allowing uncontrolled cross-arm attention. For most tasks (except the long-horizon task), we report success rate as the primary metric. For long-horizon tasks which comprise multiple stages, we additionally report a progress score and the average completion time to quantify execution quality and efficiency. Additional experimental details are provided in appendix. 

A. Single-Arm Skill Reuse 

Task Setup. Here, we evaluate whether a bimanual VLA can reuse learned single-arm skills under unseen left–right combinations. As shown in Fig. 3, our training data include three skills per arm, collected from single-arm executions while the other arm remains stationary. At test time, we ask the policy to execute a left-arm skill and a right-arm skill simultaneously in combinations that never appear in the training set. This setting directly probes skill reuse since the policy should invoke the correct per-arm behaviors and maintain stable concurrent execution, rather than reverting to familiar demonstration-time patterns. 

Performance Results. As reported in Tab. I and Tab. II, all methods perform comparably on the seen single-arm skills, but their behaviors diverge sharply when asked to zero-shot 

recompose unseen left-right combinations. In particular, π0.5 and π0-FAST achieve a 0% success rate. Qualitatively, these models frequently revert to the training-time regime in which one arm acts while the other remains idle, indicating that they primarily reproduce skill pairings present in the dataset rather than freely recombining per-arm behaviors. Moreover, when instructed to perform a two-arm task, π0.5 often exhibits instability in that the nominally “idle” arm jitters or drifts. These results are not entirely surprising since the test settings are essentially out-of-distribution (OOD) for standard VLAs and this failure mode can be attributed to 

entangled bimanual control. Because π0.5 uses a single shared representation to control both arms, each left–right pairing (b)

> (a)
> (c)

Fig. 4: Cooperative tasks. (a) SHAKE : Shake the cup with a cap without making them fall apart. (b) BALL : Lift the ball steadily. (c) 

> ALIGN : Align the blocks on the table.

effectively corresponds to a distinct latent mode specifying a coupled bimanual action. Unseen pairings therefore require a latent that is not induced by any training demonstration, producing an OOD input to the downstream action expert. TwinVLA attains non-zero success by occasionally produc-ing the intended composition. However, although it uses sep-arate VLM streams for the two arms, it relies on uncontrolled 

cross-attention between streams, which can introduce implicit coupling. This yields unpredictable interference under unseen pairings and keeps overall success low. In contrast, SkillVLA achieves a substantially higher suc-cess rate of 51% on unseen combinations. By explicitly dis-entangling per-arm skill invocation, performing skill-adaptive action generation, and enabling controlled inter-arm commu-nication only when needed, SkillVLA more reliably reuses the same single-arm behaviors under novel pairings while reducing spurious cross-arm interference. 

B. Dual-Arm (Cooperative) Skill Reproduction 

Task Setup. To evaluate whether SkillVLA can reproduce cooperative dual-arm skills that require close inter-arm coor-dination, we design three cooperative tasks (Fig. 4). These tasks fall into two categories with qualitatively different co-ordination demands. The first category, S HAKE and B ALL ,requires tight low-level alignment between the two arms. The second category, A LIGN , requires both low-level alignment and high-level coordination ; two blocks are placed near the center of the table, and the two arms must simultaneously pick the objects and align them. Importantly, the arm-object assignment is randomized across trials, requiring the policy to resolve task allocation on the fly. 

Performance Results. As reported in Tab. III, SkillVLA achieves performance comparable to the strong baseline π0.5

across all cooperative tasks. This suggests that SkillVLA can identify when cooperation is required and that its explicit communication mechanism is expressive enough to support tight inter-arm coordination when needed. 

Ablation: Cross-Attention. We further isolate the role of action-level communication by evaluating an ablation that disables cross-attention between the two action experts. This variant performs particularly poorly on S HAKE and B ALL ,confirming that cross-attention-based communication is im-portant for maintaining tight low-level alignment. On A LIGN ,which places greater emphasis on high-level task assignment TABLE III: Success Rate in Cooperative Tasks ↑

Methods Shake Ball Align Avg. 

π0.5 0.30 0.45 0.65 0.47 TwinVLA 0.15 0.55 0.55 0.42 SkillVLA 0.25 0.50 0.70 0.48 

SkillVLA w/o Attn. 0.00 0.10 0.40 0.17 

and is comparatively less sensitive to continuous low-level coupling, disabling communication results in a smaller per-formance drop. 

C. Applications in Long-Horizon Settings 

We next evaluate whether SkillVLA can (i) infer the re-quired cooperation level and (ii) switch between collaborative and non-collaborative modes within a single episode . Task setup. To this end, we design two long-horizon real-world tasks, T UBES and C OLLECT ITEMS (Fig. 5). Each task inten-tionally interleaves phases that admit independent per-arm exe-cution with phases that require explicit bimanual cooperation. As a representative example, T UBES consists of two stages with distinct coordination demands: (1) transferring tubes from one rack to another (independent per-arm collection), and (2) lifting and placing the loaded rack onto another rack (inherently cooperative bimanual manipulation). We train the model using demonstrations of three skills, i.e., transferring a tube with the left arm, transferring a tube with the right arm, and moving the rack with both arms. We then evaluate the policy zero-shot on the full long-horizon task that composes these stages. 

Performance and Efficiency Results. As shown in Fig. 5 (bottom right), SkillVLA achieves a progress score compa-rable to strong baselines, indicating that it can select an appropriate operating mode and complete the task reliably. More importantly, SkillVLA reduces average completion time 

by ≈ 21% relative to the baselines. Qualitatively, monolithic baselines tend to follow demonstration-like sequential patterns (one arm acts while the other waits), whereas SkillVLA 

leverages skill reuse to exploit parallelism when available. In T UBES , during the tube-collection stage, it concurrently invokes the single-arm tube-transfer skills with both arms (i.e., 

α = 0 ), enabling parallel left–right execution and substan-tially accelerating completion. This ability to opportunistically parallelize subtasks better utilizes the robot’s hardware and improves practical throughput. 

Mode switching via the cooperation gate. Fig. 5 (bottom left) visualizes SkillVLA ’s discrete gate output α ∈ { 0, 1},where α = 0 corresponds to independent per-arm execution and α = 1 activates inter-arm cooperation. We observe that 

α evolves coherently with task progress; it switches to α = 1 

during inherently cooperative phases such as moving the loaded rack with both arms, while remaining at α = 0 during collection phases where the arms can operate independently. This stage-consistent switching suggests that the gate can infer the required cooperation level from scene and instruction Start  Pick Tubes  Place Tubes  Pick Tube Rack      

> SkillVLA  𝝅 𝟎 .𝟓
> Place Tube Rack
> Start Pick Tube (Right) Pick Tube Rack Place Tube Rack Place Tube (Right) Pick Tube (Left) Place Tube (Left)

Fig. 5: Long-horizon tasks behaviors and results. Top: Behavior of π0.5 in T UBES . Middle left: Behavior of SkillVLA in T UBES .

Bottom left: Changes of α values throughout the completion, respectively from SkillVLA and an ablated version without discretization of 

α. Bottom right: Averaged progress score and completion time of methods on the long-horizon tasks. 

Fig. 6: Continual learning tasks and results. Left: SkillVLA in continual learning tasks, L IFT BAG and S HAKE CUP . Right: Success rates on cooperative tasks L IFT BAG and S HAKE CUP w.r.t the number of continual learning demonstrations. 

context, allowing SkillVLA to reuse both single-arm and dual-arm behaviors within a single rollout. 

Ablation: Continuous vs. Discretized Gating. We also evaluate an ablation that uses a continuous (non-discretized) gate. This variant is less stable over long horizons. As shown in Fig. 5 (bottom left), continuous α exhibits noticeably higher fluctuation despite following a similar overall trend. This instability propagates to action generation, leading to lower success and higher variance in performance (Fig. 5, bottom right). These results suggest that discretizing α improves robustness by enforcing simpler, clearer mode switching. 

D. Reuse of Learned Skills in Continual Learning 

Task setup. To answer Q4, we study whether SkillVLA can reuse learned single-arm skills to accelerate the acquisition of a new cooperative dual-arm skill via fine-tuning. As illustrated in Fig. 6 (left), we consider two task groups, LIFT BAG 

and S HAKE CUP . In each group, we first pretrain the model on the corresponding single-arm dataset (e.g., lifting a bag with one arm), and then fine-tune it with a small number of demonstrations to obtain the target dual-arm skill (e.g., lifting with both arms). For each task group, we construct a two-stage continual-learning protocol: (i) pretraining on single-arm executions to learn reusable per-arm behaviors, followed by (ii) fine-tuning on a limited set of dual-arm demonstrations to learn the cooperative variant. 

Learning Curves and Data Efficiency. Fig. 6 (right) reports success rates as a function of the number of dual-arm demon-strations used for fine-tuning. In L IFT BAG , the target dual-arm behavior is close to a composition of the pretrained single-arm skills, and SkillVLA achieves 20% success zero-shot .Moreover, with only 5 fine-tuning demonstrations, it reaches near-peak performance. In contrast, π0.5 and TwinVLA remain far from convergence even after training on 30 demonstrations. These results indicate that SkillVLA can effectively leverage previously learned single-arm behaviors for rapid adaptation. 

Adapting Skills to New Coordination. SHAKE CUP is challenging because the required coordination deviates from the original single-arm behavior; one hand must stabilize the cap rather than simply shaking the cup body. Despite this mismatch, SkillVLA exhibits the same data-efficient trend. This suggests that reuse in continual learning is not limited to replaying identical action patterns. Instead, the model can transfer related single-arm behaviors as a strong initialization and quickly adapt them into a new cooperative policy. Overall, these results support skill reuse as a practical mechanism for continual learning and for scaling generalist bimanual policies with reduced demonstration burden. VII. C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS , AND FUTURE WORK 

In this work, we study the combinatorial diversity chal-lenge in bimanual manipulation through the lens of skill reuse . We identify skill entanglement in existing VLA designs as a central obstacle to reuse—particularly for composing diverse left–right skill pairings and generalizing to unseen task combinations. To address this, we propose SkillVLA, which mitigates entanglement by explicitly separating per-arm skill invocation and enabling skill-adaptive action generation, while still leveraging the generalization of pretrained vision– language models. Across real-world evaluations, SkillVLA improves combinatorial generalization and data efficiency in continual skill acquisition, demonstrating more reliable reuse of both single-arm and cooperative dual-arm behaviors. Limitations. SkillVLA depends on pretrained VLMs for high-level reasoning and for providing priors on cooperation, which ties performance to the capability, latency, and cost profile of the underlying foundation model. Future work will explore more efficient ways to distill or compress this reasoning into lightweight policy components, as well as richer skill representations beyond natural language. More broadly, we view disentangled skill learning/selection and controlled cross-arm coupling as key ingredients for scaling toward truly generalist bimanual agents that can recombine skills reliably on demand. REFERENCES 

[1] Yahav Avigal, Lars Berscheid, Tamim Asfour, Torsten Kr¨ oger, and Ken Goldberg. Speedfolding: Learning effi-cient bimanual folding of garments. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-tems (IROS) , pages 1–8. IEEE, 2022. [2] Arpit Bahety, Shreeya Jain, Huy Ha, Nathalie Hager, Benjamin Burchfiel, Eric Cousineau, Siyuan Feng, and Shuran Song. Bag all you need: Learning a generalizable bagging strategy for heterogeneous objects. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 960–967. IEEE, 2023. [3] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shu-tong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin, Junyang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jianqiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu, and Ke Zhu. Qwen3-vl technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21631. [4] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wen-bin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, Humen Zhong, Yuanzhi Zhu, Mingkun Yang, Zhaohai Li, Jianqiang Wan, Pengfei Wang, Wei Ding, Zheren Fu, Yiheng Xu, Jiabo Ye, Xi Zhang, Tianbao Xie, Zesen Cheng, Hang Zhang, Zhibo Yang, Haiyang Xu, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2.5-vl technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13923. [5] Christian Bersch, Benjamin Pitzer, and S¨ oren Kammel. Bimanual robotic cloth manipulation for laundry folding. In 2011 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-gent Robots and Systems , pages 1413–1419. IEEE, 2011. [6] Lucas Beyer, Andreas Steiner, Andr´ e Susano Pinto, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiao Wang, Daniel Salz, Maxim Neumann, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Michael Tschan-nen, Emanuele Bugliarello, Thomas Unterthiner, Daniel Keysers, Skanda Koppula, Fangyu Liu, Adam Gryc-ner, Alexey Gritsenko, Neil Houlsby, Manoj Ku-mar, Keran Rong, Julian Eisenschlos, Rishabh Kabra, Matthias Bauer, Matko Boˇ snjak, Xi Chen, Matthias Min-derer, Paul Voigtlaender, Ioana Bica, Ivana Balazevic, Joan Puigcerver, Pinelopi Papalampidi, Olivier Henaff, Xi Xiong, Radu Soricut, Jeremiah Harmsen, and Xiaohua Zhai. Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07726. [7] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-mail, Michael Robert Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , LosAngeles, CA, USA, June 2025. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2025.XXI.010. [8] Alper Canberk, Cheng Chi, Huy Ha, Benjamin Burchfiel, Eric Cousineau, Siyuan Feng, and Shuran Song. Cloth funnels: Canonicalized-alignment for multi-purpose gar-ment manipulation. In International Conference of Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2022. [9] Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Baiyu Shi, Roy Lin, Daniel Seita, Ayah Ahmad, Richard Cheng, Thomas Kollar, David Held, and Ken Goldberg. Bagging by learning to singulate layers using interactive perception. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 3176–3183. IEEE, 2023. [10] Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Baiyu Shi, Daniel Seita, Richard Cheng, Thomas Kollar, David Held, and Ken Goldberg. Autobag: Learning to open plastic bags and insert objects. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 3918–3925, 2023. doi: 10.1109/ICRA48891.2023.10161402. [11] Tianxing Chen, Zanxin Chen, Baijun Chen, Zijian Cai, Yibin Liu, Qiwei Liang, Zixuan Li, Xianliang Lin, Yi-heng Ge, Zhenyu Gu, et al. Robotwin 2.0: A scalable data generator and benchmark with strong domain random-ization for robust bimanual robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18088 , 2025. [12] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Chuer Pan, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, Siyuan Feng, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Universal manipulation interface: In-the-wild robot teaching without in-the-wild robots. In 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) ,2024. [13] Rohan Chitnis, Shubham Tulsiani, Saurabh Gupta, and Abhinav Gupta. Efficient bimanual manipulation using learned task schemas. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 1149–1155. IEEE, 2020. [14] InternVLA-M1 Contributors. Internvla-m1: A spatially guided vision-language-action framework for generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13778 , 2025. [15] Runyu Ding, Yuzhe Qin, Jiyue Zhu, Chengzhe Jia, Shiqi Yang, Ruihan Yang, Xiaojuan Qi, and Xiaolong Wang. Bunny-visionpro: Real-time bimanual dexterous teleoperation for imitation learning. In 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-tems (IROS) , pages 12248–12255, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ IROS60139.2025.11247017. [16] Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc Toussaint, Klaus Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378 , 2023. [17] Zipeng Fu, Tony Z. Zhao, and Chelsea Finn. Mobile ALOHA: Learning bimanual mobile manipulation us-ing low-cost whole-body teleoperation. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. URL https:// openreview.net/forum?id=FO6tePGRZj. [18] Dongsheng Ge, Huan Zhao, Dianxi Li, Dongchen Han, Xiangfei Li, Jiexin Zhang, and Han Ding. A dual-arm robotic cooperative framework for multiple peg-in-hole assembly of large objects. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing , 95:102991, 2025. [19] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Rohit Girdhar, Jack-son Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 18995– 19012, 2022. [20] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR , 1(2):3, 2022. [21] Hokyun Im, Euijin Jeong, Jianlong Fu, Andrey Kolobov, and Youngwoon Lee. Twinvla: Data-efficient biman-ual manipulation with twin single-arm vision-language-action models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511. 05275. [22] Physical Intelligence, Ali Amin, Raichelle Aniceto, Ash-win Balakrishna, Kevin Black, Ken Conley, Grace Con-nors, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Jared DiCarlo, Danny Driess, Michael Equi, Adnan Esmail, Yunhao Fang, Chelsea Finn, Catherine Glossop, Thomas God-den, Ivan Goryachev, Lachy Groom, Hunter Hancock, Karol Hausman, Gashon Hussein, Brian Ichter, Szy-mon Jakubczak, Rowan Jen, Tim Jones, Ben Katz, Liyiming Ke, Chandra Kuchi, Marinda Lamb, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Yao Lu, Vishnu Mano, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Charvi Sharma, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, Will Stoeckle, Alex Swerdlow, James Tanner, Marcel Torne, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Blake Williams, Sukwon Yoo, Lili Yu, Ury Zhilinsky, and Zhiyuan Zhou. π∗

> 0.6

: a vla that learns from experience, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.14759. [23] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-mail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y. Galliker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost To-bias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Homer Walke, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Lili Yu, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16054. [24] Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ash-win Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karam-cheti, Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis, Peter David Fagan, Joey Hejna, Masha Itkina, Marion Lepert, Yecheng Jason Ma, Patrick Tree Miller, Jimmy Wu, Suneel Belkhale, Shivin Dass, Huy Ha, Arhan Jain, Abra-ham Lee, Youngwoon Lee, Marius Memmel, Sungjae Park, Ilija Radosavovic, Kaiyuan Wang, Albert Zhan, Kevin Black, Cheng Chi, Kyle Beltran Hatch, Shan Lin, Jingpei Lu, Jean Mercat, Abdul Rehman, Pan-nag R Sanketi, Archit Sharma, Cody Simpson, Quan Vuong, Homer Rich Walke, Blake Wulfe, Ted Xiao, Jonathan Heewon Yang, Arefeh Yavary, Tony Z. Zhao, Christopher Agia, Rohan Baijal, Mateo Guaman Cas-tro, Daphne Chen, Qiuyu Chen, Trinity Chung, Jaimyn Drake, Ethan Paul Foster, Jensen Gao, David An-tonio Herrera, Minho Heo, Kyle Hsu, Jiaheng Hu, Donovon Jackson, Charlotte Le, Yunshuang Li, Roy Lin, Zehan Ma, Abhiram Maddukuri, Suvir Mirchandani, Daniel Morton, Tony Nguyen, Abigail O’Neill, Rosario Scalise, Derick Seale, Victor Son, Stephen Tian, Emi Tran, Andrew E. Wang, Yilin Wu, Annie Xie, Jingyun Yang, Patrick Yin, Yunchu Zhang, Osbert Bastani, Glen Berseth, Jeannette Bohg, Ken Goldberg, Abhinav Gupta, Abhishek Gupta, Dinesh Jayaraman, Joseph J Lim, Ji-tendra Malik, Roberto Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın, Subramanian Ra-mamoorthy, Dorsa Sadigh, Shuran Song, Jiajun Wu, Michael C. Yip, Yuke Zhu, Thomas Kollar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. DROID: A Large-Scale In-The-Wild Robot Manipulation Dataset. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Delft, Netherlands, July 2024. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2024.XX.120. [25] Jaehyung Kim, Jiho Kim, Dongryung Lee, Yujin Jang, and Beomjoon Kim. A low-cost and lightweight 6 DoF bimanual arm for dynamic and contact-rich manipula-tion. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems ,LosAngeles, CA, USA, June 2025. doi: 10.15607/RSS. 2025.XXI.055. [26] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [27] Fanqi Lin, Yingdong Hu, Pingyue Sheng, Chuan Wen, Jiacheng You, and Yang Gao. Data scaling laws in imitation learning for robotic manipulation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= pISLZG7ktL. [28] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PqvMRDCJT9t. [29] Songming Liu, Lingxuan Wu, Bangguo Li, Hengkai Tan, Huayu Chen, Zhengyi Wang, Ke Xu, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. RDT-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [30] Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and qiang liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XVjTT1nw5z. [31] Jeremy Maitin-Shepard, Marco Cusumano-Towner, Jinna Lei, and Pieter Abbeel. Cloth grasp point detection based on multiple-view geometric cues with application to robotic towel folding. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 2308– 2315. IEEE, 2010. [32] Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhiram Maddukuri, Ab-hishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Albert Tung, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models : Open x-embodiment col-laboration0. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 6892–6903, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10611477. [33] Georgios Papagiannis, Norman Di Palo, Pietro Vitiello, and Edward Johns. R+ x: Retrieval and execution from everyday human videos. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 8284–8290. IEEE, 2025. [34] Karl Pertsch, Kyle Stachowicz, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Suraj Nair, Quan Vuong, Oier Mees, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. FAST: Efficient Action To-kenization for Vision-Language-Action Models. In Pro-ceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , LosAngeles, CA, USA, June 2025. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2025.XXI.012. [35] Gautam Salhotra, I Liu, Gaurav Sukhatme, et al. Learn-ing robot manipulation from cross-morphology demon-stration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03833 , 2023. [36] Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Anant Rai, Haritheja Etukuru, Yiqian Liu, Ishan Misra, Soumith Chintala, and Lerrel Pinto. On bringing robots home. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16098 , 2023. [37] Kenneth Shaw, Yulong Li, Jiahui Yang, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Ray Liu, Haoyu Xiong, Russell Mendonca, and Deepak Pathak. Bimanual dexterity for complex tasks. In 

8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=55tYfHvanf. [38] Christian Smith, Yiannis Karayiannidis, Lazaros Nalpan-tidis, Xavi Gratal, Peng Qi, Dimos V. Dimarogonas, and Danica Kragic. Dual arm manipulation—a survey. 

Robotics and Autonomous Systems , 60(10):1340–1353, 2012. ISSN 0921-8890. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. robot.2012.07.005. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S092188901200108X. [39] Wenxuan Song, Jiayi Chen, Pengxiang Ding, Han Zhao, Wei Zhao, Zhide Zhong, Zongyuan Ge, Jun Ma, and Haoang Li. Accelerating vision-language-action model integrated with action chunking via parallel decoding. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02310 , 2025. [40] RDT Team. Rdt2: Enabling zero-shot cross-embodiment generalization by scaling up umi data, September 2025. URL https://github.com/thu-ml/RDT2. [41] Chen Wang, Haochen Shi, Weizhuo Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Li Fei-Fei, and Karen Liu. DexCap: Scal-able and Portable Mocap Data Collection System for Dexterous Manipulation. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Delft, Netherlands, July 2024. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2024.XX.043. [42] Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Zhibin Tang, Chaomin Shen, and Feifei Feng. Dexvla: Vision-language model with plug-in diffusion expert for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05855 , 2025. [43] Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Minjie Zhu, Zhibin Tang, Kun Wu, Zhiyuan Xu, Ning Liu, Ran Cheng, Chaomin Shen, et al. Tinyvla: Towards fast, data-efficient vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [44] Thomas Weng, Sujay Man Bajracharya, Yufei Wang, Khush Agrawal, and David Held. Fabricflownet: Bi-manual cloth manipulation with a flow-based policy. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pages 192–202. PMLR, 2022. [45] Fan Xie, Alexander Chowdhury, M De Paolis Kaluza, Linfeng Zhao, Lawson Wong, and Rose Yu. Deep imitation learning for bimanual robotic manipulation. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33: 2327–2337, 2020. [46] Jingyun Yang, Ziang Cao, Congyue Deng, Rika Antonova, Shuran Song, and Jeannette Bohg. Equi-bot: SIM(3)-equivariant diffusion policy for generalizable and data efficient learning. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=ueBmGhLOXP. [47] Jiawen Yu, Hairuo Liu, Qiaojun Yu, Jieji Ren, Ce Hao, Haitong Ding, Guangyu Huang, Guofan Huang, Yan Song, Panpan Cai, Cewu Lu, and Wenqiang Zhang. Forcevla: Enhancing vla models with a force-aware moe for contact-rich manipulation, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2505.22159. [48] Samson Yu, Lin Kelvin, and Harold Soh. Demonstrating the Octopi-1.5 Visual-Tactile-Language Model. In Pro-ceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , LosAngeles, CA, USA, June 2025. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2025.XXI.058. [49] Tony Z. Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning Fine-Grained Bimanual Ma-nipulation with Low-Cost Hardware. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Daegu, Republic of Korea, July 2023. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.016. [50] Tony Z. Zhao, Jonathan Tompson, Danny Driess, Pete Florence, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Chelsea Finn, and Ayzaan Wahid. Aloha unleashed: A simple recipe for robot dexterity. In Pulkit Agrawal, Oliver Kroemer, and Wolfram Burgard, editors, Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 270 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1910– 1924. PMLR, 06–09 Nov 2025. URL https://proceedings. mlr.press/v270/zhao25b.html. [51] Haoyu Zhen, Xiaowen Qiu, Peihao Chen, Jincheng Yang, Xin Yan, Yilun Du, Yining Hong, and Chuang Gan. 3d-vla: A 3d vision-language-action generative world model. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09631 , 2024. [52] Huayi Zhou, Ruixiang Wang, Yunxin Tai, Yueci Deng, Guiliang Liu, and Kui Jia. You Only Teach Once: Learn One-Shot Bimanual Robotic Manipulation from Video Demonstrations. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , LosAngeles, CA, USA, June 2025. doi: 10. 15607/RSS.2025.XXI.149. [53] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, Quan Vuong, Vincent Van-houcke, Huong Tran, Radu Soricut, Anikait Singh, Jaspiar Singh, Pierre Sermanet, Pannag R. Sanketi, Gre-cia Salazar, Michael S. Ryoo, Krista Reymann, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Igor Mordatch, Henryk Michalewski, Yao Lu, Sergey Levine, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Isabel Leal, Yuheng Kuang, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Ryan Julian, Nikhil J. Joshi, Alex Irpan, Brian Ichter, Jas-mine Hsu, Alexander Herzog, Karol Hausman, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Chuyuan Fu, Pete Florence, Chelsea Finn, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Danny Driess, Tianli Ding, Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, Xi Chen, Yevgen Cheb-otar, Justice Carbajal, Noah Brown, Anthony Brohan, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas, and Kehang Han. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Jie Tan, Marc Toussaint, and Kourosh Darvish, editors, Proceedings of The 7th Confer-ence on Robot Learning , volume 229 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 06–09 Nov 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v229/zitkovich23a.html. APPENDIX AMETHOD ANALYSIS 

In this appendix, we provide a comparative analysis to justify the architectural design of SkillVLA. We identify skill entanglement in existing monolithic VLAs as a fundamental obstacle to combinatorial generalization. Building on these structural findings, we demonstrate the necessity of the fully disentangled approach adopted by SkillVLA and analyze its effectiveness in resolving entanglement. We begin by estab-lishing the geometric definitions that underpin our discussion. 

Preliminary: Support. To facilitate our geometric analysis, we first establish the concept of effective support to delineate the valid behavior of a learned policy. For a continuous policy distribution π(·| x), we define the effective support as the set of actions where the probability density is non-negligible: supp (π(·| x)) = {a ∈ A | π(a|x) > ϵ }

In this analysis, we use the support to distinguish between the training manifold (the region of the action space covered by expert demonstrations) and the target support (the region of the action space required to solve a novel recomposition task). A model’s ability to generalize to unseen tasks depends on whether its predicted support can cover the target support of the new context. 

A. Action Entanglement in Monolithic VLAs 

In this section, we provide a geometric analysis of the limitations inherent to monolithic bimanual VLAs. We demon-strate that modeling dual-arm control via a single joint distri-bution πθ (aL, a R|x) creates a structural disconnect between the training manifold and the target space required for skill recomposition. We term this limitation Action Entanglement .

Formulation of the Training Manifold. Consider a mono-lithic VLA policy trained on a dataset of expert demonstrations 

D. We define the training manifold Strain as the subset of the joint action space supported by these demonstrations: 

Strain = {(aL, a R) | ∃ x, (x, a L, a R) ∈ D} ⊂ A L × A R

In standard bimanual datasets, this manifold is typically sparse and exhibits high inter-arm correlation. For instance, if a spe-cific “lifting” skill for the left arm is only ever demonstrated while the right arm is “idling”, the manifold Strain captures this specific coupling. Consequently, the learned policy πθ

approximates the empirical joint density defined strictly over this support, internalizing the conditional dependence between the arms. 

The Geometry of Unseen Recomposition. Consider arecomposition task defined by a context x∗ that requires the concurrent execution of a known left-arm skill sL and a known right-arm skill sR. The set of valid solutions, or the target support , is the Cartesian product of the valid marginal actions for each skill: 

Starget (x∗) = supp (πsL (·| x)) × supp (πsR (·| x)) 

We define a skill combination as “unseen” when this specific pairing of behaviors has not been observed in the dataset. Geometrically, this implies that the target solution lies outside the training manifold: 

Starget (x∗) ∩ S train = ∅

Entanglement Mechanism. The core challenge of action entanglement arises from the discrepancy between the training objective and the inference requirement under this disjoint geometry. 

Training Dynamics: The objective of imitation learning is to maximize the likelihood of actions within Strain . The policy 

πθ inherently learns the correlations present in the data (e.g., 

aL ∈ Lift =⇒ aR ∈ Idle). 

Inference Failure: When presented with x∗, the model is required to generate an action a∗ ∈ S target . However, because 

a∗ lies in a region of the joint space assigned negligible prob-ability density by the learned distribution (since a∗ /∈ S train ), the monolithic model struggles to factorize the arms. Instead, the policy tends to regress to the high-density modes of the training distribution. This results in spurious crosstalk, where the execution of one arm creates a “pull” that forces the other arm to default to its training-time partner behavior, preventing the successful composition of the two skills. 

B. Latent Entanglement in Action-Expert VLAs 

We consider the broad class of action-expert VLAs, where a pretrained VLM backbone encodes the multimodal context x

into a shared latent representation z, and a downstream action module predicts actions conditioned on this z. While standard implementations typically predict the joint action (aL, a R)

monolithically (thus suffering from action entanglement), one might propose a straightforward solution: factorizing the output module to use disjoint action experts πL(aL|z) and 

πR(aR|z).In this section, we demonstrate that this decoupled archi-tecture remains insufficient for reliable recomposition due to a secondary failure mode at the vision-language interface, which we term Latent Entanglement .

Geometry of the Latent Interface. During training, the VLM backbone projects the demonstration inputs D onto a specific manifold within the latent space. We denote the effective support of these training latents as: 

Ztrain = {z = fVLM (x) | x ∈ D} 

The downstream action experts (AEs), πL and πR, are op-timized to approximate the conditional action density p(a|z)

specifically for inputs z ∈ Z train . Consequently, the reliability of these experts is strictly bounded by this learned latent support. 

Generalization Failure via OOD Latents. Consider an unseen recomposition task x∗ requiring a novel combination of skills. While the high-level VLM may generally understand this scene, it projects the global context into a single embed-ding z∗ = fVLM (x∗).Because x∗ represents a semantic combination distinct from any training example, the resulting embedding z∗ may deviate from the cluster of latents seen during training (i.e., z∗ /∈Ztrain ). This presents the downstream experts with an Out-of-Distribution (OOD) conditioning variable. Unlike the VLM backbone, these specialized experts lack web-scale pretraining and are prone to unpredictable behavior when queried with latents outside their training manifold. 

Conclusion: The Entanglement of Reasoning. This analysis reveals that the reliance on a single shared latent creates a bottleneck. The latent z must implicitly encode the cross-arm dependencies observed in the data to satisfy the training objective. Consequently, even if the action heads are struc-turally disentangled, the shared reasoning pathway entangles the control signals before they reach the experts. This highlights that true combinatorial generalization re-quires more than just output factorization; it requires the 

disentanglement of reasoning . The VLM must be capable of explicitly decomposing the global context into separate skill descriptors for each arm, rather than summarizing the joint state into a single entangled embedding. 

C. Analysis of SkillVLA 

Our theoretical analysis has identified action and latent entanglement as critical barriers to skill reuse, arising from the mismatch between the training manifold and the target space of unseen tasks. SkillVLA is explicitly designed to resolve this mismatch. In this section, we analyze the generative process of our method, demonstrating how it structurally supports single-arm skill recomposition where monolithic baselines fail. When the collaboration gate is closed ( α = 0 ), SkillVLA models the joint action distribution as a conditional product of independent streams: 

πψ (aL, a R | x) = 

Z

> u,z

p(aL | zL)p(aR | zR)

| {z }

> Independent AEs

· p(zL | x, u L)p(zR | x, u R)

| {z }

> Per-Arm VLMs

· p(uL, u R | x)

| {z }

> High-level VLM

dudz. 

This factorization enables the model to effectively cover the target support Starget for unseen skill pairs. We analyze this process in three stages: 

Semantic Decomposition to Known Primitives First, lever-aging its web-scale generalization capability, the high-level planner decomposes the novel context x∗ into explicit skill descriptors uL and uR. Crucially, while the combination 

(uL, u R) is novel to the system, the individual descriptors correspond to single-arm skills sL and sR that exist within the training repertoire. This step effectively breaks the OOD joint query into recognizable semantic units. 

In-Distribution Latent Generation Unlike shared-latent models that must encode the novel combination into a single vector, SkillVLA processes the descriptors independently: 

zL ∼ p(zL|x, u L). Since uL specifies a known skill sL

present in the training demonstrations D, the mapping from 

(x, u L) to zL constitutes an in-distribution inference task for the low-level VLM. Consequently, the generated latent 

zL naturally aligns with the manifold of latents seen during training ( Ztrain ), preventing the drift into undefined regions that characterizes latent entanglement. 

Construction of the Product Support With valid, in-distribution latents zL and zR, the independent Action Experts 

p(aL|zL) and p(aR|zR) operate within their valid domains. The resulting joint policy support is the Cartesian product of these valid marginals, supp (πψ ) = supp (p(aL|zL)) × supp (p(aR|zR)) 

Since the experts correctly recover the behaviors for the known skills sL and sR, this product space effectively covers the target support Starget (x∗). Thus, by structurally reducing an OOD joint task into ID sub-tasks, SkillVLA provides a robust mechanism for zero-shot skill recomposition. APPENDIX BIMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

Methods Implementation. Our goal is to isolate the struc-tural limitations of existing VLA systems and evaluate our pro-posed remedy under controlled settings. To avoid confounding factors, we do not introduce new backbone architectures or extensive pretraining recipes. Instead, we adopt minimal structural modifications to the primary baseline π0.5 [23], ensuring the pipeline aligns with our disentangled design while maintaining component comparability. We initialize the components using the pretrained PaliGemma checkpoints released with π0.5 [23], duplicating the low-level VLM and action experts to support disentan-gled execution. While directly using an off-the-shelf VLM is possible, prior to policy learning, we perform a lightweight vision-language fine-tuning of the high-level VLM on subtask generation data to ensure prompting stability; this module then remains frozen throughout the main training phase, where only the low-level VLMs are fine-tuned via independent LoRA adapters [20]. The cross-attention module, which enables controlled inter-action between the two action experts, employs independent query/key/value (QKV) projections trained from scratch. For action sampling, we maintain the flow-matching time schedule identical to the original π0.5 implementation. Finally, the cooperation-level estimator is implemented as a Transformer decoder that attends to the high-level VLM’s KV cache via cross-attention. 

Cooperation Prior. To obtain the cooperation level labels used as learning priors, we preprocess the training dataset using a frozen Qwen3-VL-32B model [3]. Specifically, we prompt the model annotate the degree of required inter-arm coordination, augmenting the dataset with these values as part of ground-truth supervision for the cooperation estimator. TABLE IV: Cooperative Task Details            

> Abbr. Task Description
> Shake SHAKE CUP A cup with a loose cap is placed on the table. The robot must shake the cup bimanually, with one arm securing the cap to prevent separation. This requires the arms to move synchronously to maintain the assembly’s integrity. Lift LIFT BALL A ball rests on a stand. The robot must lift the ball using both arms. The upward motion must be synchronized in velocity to maintain equilibrium and prevent the ball from rotating or falling. Align ALIGN BLOCKS Two blocks are placed on the table. The robot must grasp one block with each arm and place them onto the table simultaneously such that they align collinearly.

Start  Relocate Block (L) 

& Reach Drawer (R)  Open Drawer  Place  Toy (R)  Place Block (R)  Place Block 

Fig. 7: Rollout of SkillVLA on C OLLECT ITEMS .APPENDIX CEXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 

A. Baselines 

π0-FAST and π0.5. Contemporary VLA architectures pre-dominantly fall into two paradigms: autoregressive generation and diffusion-based modeling. We select π0-FAST [34] and 

π0.5 [23] as representative state-of-the-art baselines for these respective categories, allowing us to evaluate performance across both dominant design spaces. 

TwinVLA. To extend our evaluation to architectures beyond mainstream monolithic models, we additionally include Twin-VLA [21] as a baseline. This method is constructed by dupli-cating a single-arm VLA to improve training efficiency, incor-porating cross-attention between the parallel VLM streams to enable inter-arm communication. We reproduce this architec-ture to evaluate the performance of current factorized designs. 

B. Experimental Details 1) Skill Recomposition Tasks: We conduct skill recompo-sition experiments to evaluate the capability for single-arm skill reuse. In our protocol, models are trained on a set of independent single-arm skills, using 50 demonstrations per skill. We first validate that the models have mastered these source behaviors by conducting 10 evaluation rollouts for each original skill. Subsequently, we assess zero-shot generalization by testing the models on unseen skill combinations, perform-ing 10 evaluation episodes for each pairing to establish the comparative trends in skill reuse. 

2) Cooperative Tasks: Our experiments include three co-operative tasks—S HAKE CUP , LIFT BALL , and ALIGN 

BLOCKS —designed to probe the efficacy of inter-arm com-munication (see Table IV for details). Each task necessitates strict bimanual coupling, ranging from synchronized low-level actuation to high-level planning. For each distinct task, we collect a dataset of 50 demonstrations and train task-specific models. To ensure statistical reliability for evaluating performances, we evaluate each model on each task over 20 rollouts. 

3) Long-Horizon Tasks: Our experiments include two long-horizon tasks: T UBES and C OLLECT ITEMS . We train task-specific policies separately using demonstrations of the skills required for each task (Fig. 8 and 9), collecting 50 demonstra-tions per skill. For evaluation, we use the same set of items in the same environment, while randomizing the initial object placements across trials to ensure a fair comparison. We run 10 evaluation episodes per task, resulting in 20 total evaluations for each method. For evaluation, we report the average progress rate to reflect overall task performance. The progress rate of each episode is defined as the achieved progress score divided by the maximum score of the corresponding task. Details for each task are as follows:  

> •

TUBES : The task starts with two tube racks placed next to each other on the table: one rack is empty and the other holds two tubes. The robot must (i) transfer both tubes to the empty rack, and then (ii) lift the rack containing the tubes using both arms and place it onto the other rack. +1 For each tube successfully transferred. ×2

+1 For successfully placing the rack. 

Maximum score: 3 points.  

> •

COLLECT ITEMS : The task starts with two items and a closed drawer on the table. The robot must (i) open the drawer using both arms, (ii) load both items into the drawer, and then (iii) close the drawer using both arms. Notably, as shown in Fig. 7, one item is initially located behind the drawer and cannot be placed into it directly. The robot must first use one arm to relocate this item to a position above the drawer reachable to the other arm, and then use the other arm to place it into the drawer. +1 For opening the drawer. +1 For relocating the behind-drawer item to above the drawer. Transfer Tube (L)  Transfer Tube (R)  Transfer Rack Fig. 8: Skills Learned for T UBES .Place  Block Relocate Block  

> Place Toy Open Drawer Close Drawer

Fig. 9: Skills Learned for C OLLECT ITEMS .+1 For each item placed into the drawer. ×2

+1 For closing the drawer. 

Maximum score: 5 points. 

Additionally, we report completion time to reflect behavioral efficiency. Since fully successful episodes are sparse, we compute a progress-normalized completion time and average it only over episodes with non-zero progress. Concretely, 

tnorm = 1

|I| 

X

> i∈I

ti

si

,

where ti is the execution time of the i-th evaluation episode, 

si ∈ (0 , 1] is its progress rate, and |I| denotes the number of episodes that achieve non-zero progress. 

4) Continual-Learning Tasks: Our evaluation includes two groups of continual learning tasks. In this protocol, we first pretrain the models on fundamental single-arm skills using 50 demonstrations per skill. Subsequently, we fine-tune the models on dual-arm tasks using varying numbers of limited demonstrations, as stated in the main text. To ensure statistical reliability, we evaluate the models over 20 rollouts after each fine-tuning stage.