Title: The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision-Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.22278v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 02:55:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Kelly Cui * 1 Nikhil Prakash * 2 Ayush Raina 3 David Bau 2 Antonio Torralba 1 Tamar Rott Shaham 1

# Abstract 

Many multimodal tasks, such as image caption-ing and visual question answering, require vi-sion–language models (VLMs) to associate ob-jects with their properties and spatial relations. Yet it remains unclear where and how such as-sociations are computed within VLMs. In this work, we show that VLMs rely on two concur-rent mechanisms to represent such associations. In the language model backbone, intermediate layers represent content-independent spatial re-lations on top of visual tokens corresponding to objects. However, this mechanism plays only a secondary role in shaping model predictions. In-stead, the dominant source of spatial information originates in the vision encoder, whose representa-tions encode the layout of objects and are directly exploited by the language model backbone. No-tably, this spatial signal is distributed globally across visual tokens, extending beyond object re-gions into surrounding background areas. We show that enhancing these vision-derived spatial representations globally across all image tokens improves spatial reasoning performance on natu-ralistic images. Together, our results clarify how spatial association is computed within VLMs and highlight the central role of vision encoders in enabling spatial reasoning. 

# 1. Introduction 

Spatial reasoning, the ability to associate objects with their properties and their relations to other elements, is a fun-damental component of multimodal understanding (Cheng et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024b; Goetting et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2025). Tasks such as image captioning, visual question answering, and visual navigation require vision–language models (VLMs) to bind 

> *

Equal contribution 1MIT CSAIL 2Northeastern Uni-versity 3Sony Playstation. Correspondence to: Nikhil Prakash <prakash.nik@northeastern.edu >, Tamar Rott Shaham 

<tamarott@mit.edu >.

Preprint. March 24, 2026. 

objects to spatial relations and reason about their relative arrangement within the scene. Although recent advances have made VLMs highly capable across many tasks, spatial reasoning remains a significant challenge (Campbell et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025; Wen et al., 2024; Kamath et al., 2023b). In this work, we investigate the internal mecha-nisms underlying spatial reasoning in VLMs and show how understanding these mechanisms enables targeted interven-tions to improve reasoning performance. In language models (LMs), recent studies have shown that associating entities with their attributes (often referred to as variable binding) is done by forming symbolic repre-sentations for each entity in context. This representation encodes content-independent information about the order of entities in context, and allows the model to distinguish be-tween entities and retrieve entity-specific information when needed (Dai et al., 2024; Prakash et al., 2024; 2025). Follow-up studies suggest that VLMs similarly rely on ordering in-formation when reasoning about objects in images (Assouel et al., 2025; Kang et al., 2026). However, while these find-ings establish the use of ordering-based representations dur-ing multimodal reasoning, they do not reveal their origin. In particular, it remains unclear whether such representations are constructed within the LM backbone, inherited from the vision encoder, or emerge from interactions between the two. Identifying the source of these representations is essential for understanding spatial reasoning failures in VLMs and for developing principled methods to diagnose and correct them. We show that the ordering-based representations underly-ing spatial reasoning in VLMs arise from two concurrent sources: The vision encoder represents the global layout of objects in the image, encoding ordering information that is directly projected into the embedding space of the LM backbone. Then, the LM backbone can further augment these representations by forming ordering information over object-associated visual tokens. While the vision encoder provides the primary source of ordering information, the LM-side mechanism plays a secondary role, augmenting spatial ordering when that information in the vision embed-dings is degraded or completely removed. Notably, the ordering information provided by the vision en-coder is distributed globally across visual tokens, extending 1

> arXiv:2603.22278v1 [cs.CV] 23 Mar 2026 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models

beyond object regions into surrounding background areas. This is in contrast to the LM backbone, where information is formed locally over object-related tokens, similar to the process found in language processing (Prakash et al., 2025; Assouel et al., 2025). We establish these results primarily through a series of controlled interchange intervention experiments (Vig et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022; Geiger et al., 2022) using carefully constructed counterfactual samples. We first examine three synthetic datasets, which allow us to isolate and analyze spatial mechanisms under controlled conditions (Fig. 1). We also show our finding generalizes to the What’sUp dataset (Kamath et al., 2023b), a real-world benchmark designed to assess the spatial reasoning capabilities of state-of-the-art models. We validate our findings across two transformer-based VLMs, Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct 

and Gemma-3-4b-it , showing that both rely on similar mechanisms to solve spatial reasoning tasks. Finally, leveraging this mechanistic understanding, we in-troduce a simple global intervention on vision embeddings that amplifies the ordering information across all image tokens. On the What’sUp dataset, this intervention cor-rects more than 50% of previously incorrect predictions in 

Gemma-3-4b-it and more than 30% of incorrect predic-tions in Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct .Overall, our results elucidate the mechanisms underlying spatial association in VLMs, connect binding mechanisms identified in LMs to multimodal reasoning, and demonstrate the central role of vision encoders in supporting spatial reasoning in VLMs. 

# 2. Related Works 

Benchmarking Spatial Reasoning Many benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate spatial reasoning in VLMs, including synthetic datasets designed to test compositional relations and naturalistic benchmarks derived from real im-ages and human annotations (Kamath et al., 2023a; Chen et al., 2024a; Gholami et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2025). These benchmarks have revealed that spatial reasoning remains challenging for current VLMs, particularly as relational complexity increases or when reasoning must generalize beyond object-centric cues. Instead of measuring perfor-mances, we perform a mechanistic analysis of spatial rea-soning tasks, aiming to identify and improve the internal model mechanisms responsible for solving them. 

Understanding Inner Working of VLMs A growing body of work has investigated the internal workings of VLMs, examining cross-modal attention patterns, token alignment, representational geometry, and information flow between vision encoders and LM backbones (Nikankin et al., Squares Shapes 

Objects What‘sUp             

> “The <property> of the <object type> to the
> <direction> of <reference object> is ”Figure 1. Experimental Settings and Spatial Reasoning Task Definition: We study four distinct image datasets to analyze the internal mechanisms of spatial reasoning in VLMs – three synthetic settings (Squares, Shapes, Objects) and one naturalistic setting (What’sUp). The model is queried to identify a specific property (e.g., color) of a target object based on its spatial relation (e.g., “to the left” or “to the right”) relative to a central reference object.

2025; Qin et al., 2025; Assouel et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2025; Neo et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2024; Kaduri et al., 2025; Rott Shaham et al., 2024; Cohen et al., 2026). These studies have provided valuable insights into how visual and textual information is integrated and how multimodal repre-sentations emerge. Our work builds on this line of research by focusing specifically on the mechanisms underlying spa-tial association and reasoning. 

Symbolic Representation in LMs & VLMs Several stud-ies have shown that LMs implement variable binding by forming content-independent ordering identifiers, over im-portant tokens (Gur-Arieh et al., 2025; Prakash et al., 2025; Dai et al., 2024; Prakash et al., 2024; Feng & Steinhardt, 2023; Davies et al., 2023). These mechanisms underly-ing variable binding are fundamental to many in-context reasoning tasks and have been presented as evidence of symbol-like processing in neural networks. Recent work has extended this line of inquiry to VLMs, investigating sim-ilar symbolic representations (Kang et al., 2026; Assouel et al., 2025; Saravanan et al., 2025; Hasani et al., 2025). Our findings relate to this body of work while revealing an im-portant distinction in the multimodal setting. We show that although VLMs form symbolic representations that encode ordering information within the LM backbone, this mech-anism explains only part of the model’s spatial reasoning capabilities. Instead, symbolic representations originating from the vision encoder play a dominant role. 2The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models             

> Table 1. Model’s accuracy on spatial reasoning tasks.
> Squares Shapes Objects What’sUp Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.89 Gemma-3-4b-it 0.98 0.99 0.99 0.91

# 3. Experimental Setup 

3.1. Data 

We study a spatial reasoning task in which the model must identify a property (e.g., color or shape) of an object located at a specific spatial relation to a reference object. For ex-ample, for the Squares image shown in Fig. 1, the query may be “ The color of the square to the left of the green square is ”, for which the correct answer is “ red ”. For clarity, we present experimental setups and results for the Squares 

setting in the main text, and report results for the remaining settings in the appendix. 

Synthetic Settings We consider three synthetic set-tings— Squares , Shapes , and Objects . In all settings, three equal-sized items are placed at fixed, equal distances and arranged either horizontally or vertically. The settings dif-fer only in visual content: Squares uses colored squares, 

Shapes uses colored geometric shapes, and Objects uses real-world object images. All images are generated pro-grammatically from predefined collections of colors, shapes, and objects (see full list at App. A), enabling precise control over attributes and spatial configuration. For each image, we query the VLM to predict an attribute (color, shape, or object name) of a target entity (square, shape, or object) based on its relative position to a reference entity. For our intervention experiments (see Sec. 5), we sample 50 pairs of clean-counterfactual images from each setting. 

Naturalistic Setting In addition to the synthetic settings, we study real images from the What’sUp dataset (Kamath et al., 2023b). Specifically, we use the control subset of the dataset, which consists of images containing pairs of objects: a central reference object (e.g., a chair) and a sec-ondary object positioned adjacent to it on either side. To adapt this dataset to our intervention experiments (Sec. 5), which require images containing three objects, we construct composite scenes by merging pairs of What’sUp images into a single image with a shared reference object and two surrounding objects, resulting in 1074 images. We note that this control subset supports only horizontal spatial relations, limiting this setting to horizontal spatial reasoning. 

3.2. Models 

We study the mechanisms underlying spatial reasoning in two transformer-based VLMs: Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct ,

Gemma-3-4b-it . These models differ in scale and training data, allowing us to assess whether the identified mecha-nisms generalize across diverse VLM designs. The behav-ioral performance of the models on the spatial reasoning task is summarized in Table 1. As shown, both models achieve near-perfect performance on the synthetic settings and strong performance on the What’sUp dataset, enabling reliable causal analysis. 

3.3. Methods Representation Probing Probing methods are widely used to analyze what information is encoded in the internal representations of neural networks (Belinkov, 2022). In this framework, a probe is typically a lightweight classifier trained to predict a target property y from an internal repre-sentation h ∈ Rd extracted from the model. In its simplest form, a linear probe takes the form 

ˆy = Wh + b, (1) where W and b are learned parameters. Successful prob-ing that generalizes to test cases indicates that the target information is linearly decodable from h, suggesting that it is present in the model’s representation. However, probe performance alone does not establish that the probed repre-sentation plays a causal role in the model’s behavior (Hewitt & Manning, 2019). As a result, probing is best interpreted as a diagnostic tool for localizing candidate representations, and is often combined with causal interventions to distin-guish correlational encoding from functional relevance. 

Causal Mediation Analysis Interchange intervention is a technique for testing causal relationships between a model’s internal representations and its behavior (Vig et al., 2020; Meng et al., 2022). Let f (·) denote the model, and let hℓ(x)

denote the internal representation at component or layer 

ℓ produced during a forward pass on input x. Given an 

original input x and a corresponding counterfactual input 

x′, an interchange intervention replaces hℓ(x) with hℓ(x′)

while keeping the remainder of the computation unchanged. This yields an intervened output 

ˆyint = f  x; hℓ ← hℓ(x′), (2) a procedure commonly referred to as activation patching . If the intervened output ˆyint matches the target outcome asso-ciated with the counterfactual input, this provides evidence that the intervened representation hℓ plays a causal role in the model’s computation. We quantify this effect using in-terchange intervention accuracy (IIA) (Geiger et al., 2022). In our setting, rather than measuring binary agreement with the intervention target as in the original definition of IIA, we measure the average probability assigned to the target intervention outcome token. By carefully constructing origi-nal–counterfactual input pairs, interchange interventions can be used not only to identify which components are causally involved in a task, but also to characterize the specific infor-mation or transformations those components mediate. 3The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

# 4. Preliminaries 

4.1. Ordering Information in LMs 

Variable binding is the process of associating attributes with their respective entities. For instance, given a red, green, and blue square, the process of assigning the color feature to each square involves variable binding. Owing to its fun-damental role in reasoning, recent works have investigated the underlying mechanisms that enable it in LMs (Prakash et al., 2025; Dai et al., 2024). While these studies differ in their specific analyses, a common theme is that LMs rely on content-independent ordering representations to bind en-tities to their attributes. These representations encode the order of entities independently of their content and align this ordering with a corresponding order over attributes in the context, enabling the model to retrieve entity-specific infor-mation when queried. For instance, given a prompt such as “Box A contains an apple, box B contains a banana, and box C contains cherries. What is the color of the fruit in box B? ”, the model uses ordering information corresponding to the second entity ( Box B ) to retrieve the attributes of the corre-sponding second fruit ( banana ). Prior analyses suggest that such ordering information is formed in intermediate layers on top of entity-related token positions and is subsequently transferred to the final token position when answering a query, where it is used to retrieve the relevant property (e.g., the color “ yellow ” of the banana). In this work, we find that VLMs similarly form ordering information over visual tokens corresponding to objects in an image and use this information to reason about the spatial locations of objects and their attributes. However, as we show in the following sections, this LM-style ordering mechanism plays only a secondary role in multimodal spatial reasoning. 

4.2. Ordering Information in VLMs 

In VLMs, spatial variable binding is a fundamental capa-bility central to many spatial reasoning tasks. Recently, (Assouel et al., 2025) demonstrates that when VLMs are queried about objects within images, they retrieve sym-bolic representations that encode position of visual tokens. While this work establishes the existence of such ordering representations for visual variable binding tasks, it does not characterize the source of it. Specifically, the work mainly shows that for variable binding, the model uses this symbolic representation at the last token position, and that it comes from visual tokens; however it remains unclear 

where and how VLMs create ordering information. In par-ticular, it remains unclear whether ordering representations are constructed within the LM backbone, inherited directly from the vision encoder, or emerge through interactions be-tween the two components. In this work, we investigate the mechanisms that give rise to ordering-based representations underlying spatial reasoning in VLMs, and show that the source of this is two-fold: the vision encoder encodes po-sitional information reflecting the spatial layout of objects, while the LM backbone further enhances this information in a manner analogous to ordering mechanisms observed in language processing. Understanding the origin of these representations enables a simple and principled intervention that improves spatial reasoning performance. 

# 5. Experiments 

We analyze the mechanisms that give rise to the ordering-based representations underlying spatial reasoning. 

5.1. VLMs Use Ordering Information for Spatial Reasoning 

We begin by establishing the presence of ordering represen-tations that the model uses at the final token position, across a range of tasks, as described in Sec. 3.1, by conducting interchange intervention experiments at the final token posi-tion. Specifically, we separately patch the residual stream vector of each layer at the last token position with that from a counterfactual sample (see Fig. 3) featuring different square colors in the image and a different directional query. If the model uses the ordinal position of the queried square to retrieve its color, we expect this ordering information to be transferred from the counterfactual run to the clean run. Concretely, in the counterfactual run corresponding to Fig. 3, if the model encodes a representation indicating that the third object is the correct one, patching this representation into the clean run should cause the model to select the object with the same ordinal position in the clean image. As a result, the output should change from the color of the originally selected object (the leftmost square; Red ) to the color of the square in the clean image corresponding to the third position ( Blue ), which matches the correct position in the counterfactual run. In contrast, if the model directly transfers attribute infor-mation rather than ordering information, patching the final-token representation from the counterfactual run should cause the output to reflect the color of the queried square in the counterfactual image itself (e.g., Black in Fig. 3), independent of the object selected in the clean image. Ob-serving this behavior would indicate that color information (rather than ordinal position) is being transferred by the in-tervention. We quantify the effect of this intervention using interchange intervention accuracy (IIA; Section 3.3). Figure 2 shows that the final output initially corresponds to the color of the correct square of the clean input between layers 0-19 , indicating that the intervention on these layers has no effect. It then switches to selecting the color of the square in the clean image corresponding to the ordinal position of the correct square in the counterfactual image 20-

4The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models  

> Figure 2. Last Token Position Patching Results : The final output of the clean run remains unchanged up to layer 19. From layer 20 through layer 22, the model produces the expected prediction, suggesting that these layers encode the order of the target square. Beyond layer 22, the model instead predicts the counterfactual output, indicating that layers after 22 encode the color of the target square.

Clean Counterfactual           

> The color of the square to the
> left of the green square is The color of the square to the
> right of the green square is
> Figure 3. Experimental Setup for Last-Token Position Patch-ing. We perform an interchange intervention experiment to test whether ordering information is used for spatial reasoning. The clean example contains an image with Red–Green–Blue squares, and the prompt queries the square to the left of the green square (answer: Red ). The counterfactual example contains an image with Gray–Green–Black squares and queries the square to the right of the green square (answer: Black ). We patch the residual stream vector at the final token (“is”) from the counterfactual run into the clean run and examine how the model’s output changes. If ordering information is transferred, the model should output the color of the object in the clean image with the same ordinal position as the correct object in the counterfactual image ( Blue ); if attribute information is transferred, the output should instead reflect the counterfactual color ( Black ).

22 , indicating that ordering information is being transferred. At layers 23–27 , the model switches to the color of the counterfactual correct square, indicating that correct color attribute information is being transferred directly. This pattern suggests that the model first computes an or-dering representation of the correct square and then, in later layers, retrieves its corresponding color information. For clarity, we present results for the Squares setting for the Qwen model. Consistent behavior is observed across all settings (App. B.1). Results are averaged over 50 clean–counterfactual pairs per setting. For convenience, the plots use the color scheme from the example in Fig. 3; however, the specific colors, shapes, and object categories vary across data points, as well as the queried directions. 

5.2. Is Vision Encoder the Source of Ordering Representations? 

While the previous subsection established the presence of ordering representations, it did not fully characterize them. In particular, a key open question concerns where these ordering representations are generated within VLMs: are they produced in the LM backbone, the vision encoder, or through interactions between the two components? Identify-ing the source of ordering representations is important not only for understanding how they arise, but also for enabling targeted mechanistic interventions to improve the spatial reasoning capabilities of VLMs. 5.2.1. P ROBING VISUAL EMBEDDINGS 

We begin by asking whether ordering representations origi-nate in the vision encoder. To address this question, we train linear probes on visual token embeddings, extracted imme-diately after projection from the vision encoder, to predict the ordinal position of each object in the image. Successful probe performance indicates that ordering information is linearly decodable from the visual embedding. For each image setting described in Section 3.1, we train two linear probes, one for horizontal and one for vertical config-urations, to classify embeddings as one of three spatial posi-tions. Training data is constructed using token embeddings extracted from 90 images; the embeddings that correspond to the three objects in an image serve as positive examples for their respective positions. In the Squares , Shapes , and 

Objects datasets, identifying the visual tokens associated with each object is straightforward due to their fixed spatial layouts. In contrast, objects in the What’sUp dataset vary in size and are not aligned to fixed positions. To handle this, we preprocess What’sUp images by extracting bounding boxes for each object and use their spatial coordinates to identify the corresponding visual tokens (see Fig. 33). The resulting classifiers achieve nearly perfect accuracy on a test set of 30 images. In addition to classifying object-token representations, we also apply the probes to all other tokens in the image to assess whether ordering information representations are present in them. We find that the information about the object ordering is not confined to tokens corresponding to the objects themselves, but is instead distributed across multiple background tokens, as shown in Fig. 4. Notably, probe predictions exhibit a strip-5The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models     

> Position 0 Position 1 Position 2
> Figure 4. Position information in visual embeddings extends beyond object regions. We train linear probes on top of object to-kens of the visual embedding to predict their order in the image. At test time, these probes generalize to background tokens, producing strips-like pattern aligned with object position. This suggests that background tokens encode positional information about nearby objects. Please see App. B.4 for more complex arrangements.

like spatial pattern aligned with object position, indicating that positional information is distributed coherently across background tokens rather than localized to object regions. This behavior contrasts with prior work on LMs (Prakash et al., 2024; 2025; Dai et al., 2024), which shows that such representations are typically localized to a single token or a small set of adjacent tokens. In the following subsections, we demonstrate that the information contained in these strips is causally relevant for producing the correct final output. In Sec. 5.4, we further leverage this observation by intervening along probe directions to improve model performance. 5.2.2. C AUSAL INTERVENTION ON VISION TOKENS 

Although the probing results demonstrate the presence of or-dering information in visual representations, they do not by themselves establish a causal relationship with the model’s final output. We therefore perform interchange intervention experiments to test whether systematically manipulating these representations leads to corresponding changes in the model’s predictions. As illustrated in Fig. 5, we intervene on visual token em-beddings by swapping the left and right strips of the clean image with those from a counterfactual image. Specifically, we replace the embeddings of the left strip in the clean im-age with the right-strip embeddings from the counterfactual image, and vice versa. The intervention is designed such that both patched regions contain squares of the same color, ensuring that square color values are preserved and that only ordering information is altered. In addition to intervening on the visual token embeddings, we also separately patch the corresponding residual stream vectors of each subsequent layer of the LM backbone. If ordering information encoded by the vision encoder is causally relevant, this intervention should cause the model’s final output on the clean image to switch from the left square (red) to the right square (blue), reflecting the swapped or-Clean Counterfactual    

> The color of the square to the
> left of the green square is The color of the square to the
> right of the green square is
> (a) Object Patching (b) Strip Patching
> Figure 5. Experimental design for causal intervention on visual token embeddings : We perform two interchange interventions on the visual token embeddings: (a) patching only the tokens corre-sponding to the squares, and (b) patching the tokens corresponding to both the squares and their corresponding background strips as observed in probing experiments. In both cases, visual tokens corresponding to the left and right squares (and, in (b), their as-sociated strips) are symmetrically swapped (i.e. lef ↔right) from counterfactual to clean runs. If the patched visual tokens encode ordering information, the model’s final output in the clean run should switch to the square on the opposite side of the queried reference object, since the patched representations now carry the ordering information corresponding to the queried direction.

dering information. As shown in Fig. 7, we observe the expected change in the final output when either the visual to-ken embeddings or the residual stream vectors up to layer 24 are patched. In contrast, patching only the square-localized visual tokens, without the surrounding strip, does not reli-ably induce this change (Fig. 6). This result indicates that ordering information encoded by the vision encoder is not localized to object tokens alone, but is instead distributed across strip-aligned visual tokens. We observe similar behavior in other settings, including Shapes, Objects, and What’sUp, which also generalizes to 

Gemma-3-4b-it , as described in App. B.2. All results are averaged over 50 samples. Moreover, the fact that the original correct square logit overtakes the intervened one around layer 23 indicates that by that layer, all the required information, including both ordering and color value in-formation, is transferred to the last token, as discussed in Sec. 4.2. 

5.3. LM Backbone Enhances Ordering Information 

In the previous sections, we showed that visual token embed-dings produced by the vision encoder and projector module already encode object ordering information. We now ask what role, if any, the LM backbone plays in spatial reason-ing. In particular, does the LM backbone merely consume ordering information provided by the vision components, or can it generate such information when needed? 6The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models   

> Figure 6. Object patching . Interchange interventions applied only to visual tokens corresponding to the squares. Patching square tokens at any layer does not reliably change the model’s final output relative to the clean run, indicating that square-localized tokens alone do not carry sufficient ordering information to determine the model’s prediction.
> Figure 7. Strip patching . Interchange interventions applied to both square tokens and their background strips immediately switch the model’s output to the incorrect color in the clean image, consistent with the transferred ordering information. This demonstrates that ordering information is distributed across strip-aligned visual tokens and is causally relevant for spatial reasoning.

5.3.1. R EMOVING ORDERING INFORMATION FROM 

VISION EMBEDDINGS 

To isolate the contribution of the LM backbone, we first ab-late ordering information from the visual token embeddings using the interventions illustrated in Fig. 9. Specifically, we apply two modifications: (1) we replace the embedding of each square with an embedding of the same-colored square taken from an image in which that square appears alone in the middle of the image, thereby preserving color informa-tion while removing relative ordering; and (2) we replace all background-token embeddings with those from an empty image, eliminating ordering information encoded in back-ground regions. Together, these interventions effectively remove ordering information originating from the vision encoder, while preserving object colors. We do not apply this intervention to the What’sUp dataset, as constructing a precise intervention is challenging for natural images. As shown in Table 2, removing ordering information from the vision embeddings leads to a substantial drop in per-formance across datasets, confirming the central role of vision-derived ordering information. However, performance remains above chance ( 33 .3% ), suggesting that the LM backbone can compensate for the missing ordering signals. 5.3.2. D O LM S BACKUP ORDERING INFORMATION ?To test whether the LM backbone generates its own order-ing information, we perform an interchange intervention experiment analogous to that described in Section 5.2.2, but          

> Table 2. Behavioral performance after removing spatial informa-tion from vision embeddings.
> Squares Shapes Objects Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct 0.60 0.62 0.43 Gemma-3-4b-it 0.64 0.82 0.77

under the ablated-vision setting described above (e.g. the LM gets images with no ordering information from the vi-sion encoder). In contrast to earlier experiments, here we patch only the square-associated visual tokens, rather than the entire strips. If the LM backbone generates ordering information inde-pendently, then patching square tokens from a counterfac-tual run should transfer this order information and induce a change in the final output. If not, the model’s prediction should remain unchanged. The results are shown in Fig. 8. We observe a flip in model prediction according to order information only in intermediate layers, within the range of 13-17. This indicates that, when vision-derived order-ing information is removed, the LM backbone forms its own ordering representations in these middle layers, and that patching these representations switches the prediction according to the patched order, causally affecting the final prediction. Together, these results indicate that VLMs rely on two sources of ordering information: a primary signal origi-nating from the vision encoder and projector module, and a secondary signal generated within the LM backbone. While 7The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models       

> Figure 8. Patching results after removing ordering information from the vision encoder. The model’s output switches only in intermediate layers within the range of 11-20, indicating that the LM backbone generates ordering information even when vision-derived ordering representations are absent. (2) Removing background position information
> (1) Removing squares
> position information
> Figure 9. Ordering information is ablated from vision embed-dings by replacing square embeddings with same-colored isolated middle squares and background embeddings with those from an empty image, preserving color while removing position cues.

the vision-derived signal dominates when present, the LM backbone can partially reconstruct ordering information and act as a backup mechanism. Supporting evidence for this interpretation is provided in Figs. 7, 18, 17, where we show that vertically arranged objects strengthen ordering signals in the same intermediate LM layers, indicating the LM backbone enhances the ordering information provided by the vision embedding in these cases. 

5.4. Correcting Incorrect Predictions 

We leverage the mechanistic insights from the previous sections to improve spatial reasoning performance on the What’sUp dataset. Our analysis shows that ordering infor-mation is essential for spatial reasoning and that the vision encoder and projector module provide the primary source of this information. We therefore hypothesize that amplify-ing vision-derived ordering representations can improve a VLM’s spatial reasoning ability. To test this hypothesis, we enhance the ordering information in the vision embeddings by amplifying probe directions identified for the What’sUp dataset in Section 5.2. These probe directions are trained to capture dimensions encoding ordering information; ampli-fying them should therefore strengthen the ordering signal produced by the vision encoder and projector module.                   

> Table 3. Amplifying ordering representation enhances spatial reasoning.
> Gemma Qwen Intervention Acc. % Corr. Fail. Acc. % Corr. Fail.
> None 0.9 –0.89 –Random amp. 0.92 15.8% 0.9 8.8% Ordering amp. 0.95 50.7 %0.93 32.4 %

Formally, for each visual token t, we modify its embedding: 

emb t ← emb t + α · probe i, (3) where α ∈ [1 , 15] is an amplification coefficient and probe i

is the probe direction corresponding to object i in the image. We apply this intervention to all visual token embeddings, across all probe directions. As a baseline, we perform the same intervention using randomly sampled directions, allow-ing us to isolate the effect of amplifying ordering-specific representations. Table 3 shows that amplifying visual or-dering representations corrects more than 50% of previ-ously incorrect predictions for Gemma-3-4b-it and more than 30% for Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct , outperforming random-direction amplification. This intervention improves overall accuracy by up to 5% , without any fine-tuning or access to ground-truth labels. Together, these results demon-strate that directly strengthening vision-derived ordering information can improve spatial reasoning in VLMs. 

# 6. Conclusions 

We show that spatial reasoning in VLMs relies on ordering representations arising from two complementary sources: a primary signal encoded by the vision encoder and a sec-ondary mechanism formed within the LM backbone. By isolating, intervening on, and amplifying these representa-tions, we demonstrate a simple intervention that corrects spatial reasoning failures. Together, our results highlight how mechanistic understanding can be translated into in-sights that can lead to improved model performance. 8The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

# Acknowledgment 

This research was supported by Sony Playstation, ARL grant #W911NF-24-2-0069, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab grant #W1771646, and Hyundai Motor Company. NP and DB were supported by Coefficient Giving. 

# Impact Statement 

This work underscores the critical role of the vision encoder in multimodal systems, challenging the prevailing focus on the language backbone. By demonstrating that the dominant symbolic representations for spatial reasoning originate in the visual components, we highlight that future advances in VLMs must prioritize the training of robust vision encoders to ensure accurate spatial layout encoding. Furthermore, we establish the practical utility of mechanistic interpretability by showing that understanding these internal mechanisms allows for targeted interventions, specifically, amplifying vision-derived spatial signals, that significantly improve performance on state-of-the-art benchmarks without the need for additional training or fine-tuning. Methodologically, our discovery that spatial information is diffused across multiple visual tokens, extending even into background regions, signals a necessary paradigm shift for interpretability research. Standard analysis techniques that focus on single tokens are insufficient for capturing these distributed representations. As the field moves toward rea-soning models that generate increasingly long sequences of tokens, developing interpretability methods capable of ana-lyzing information distributed across multiple tokens will be essential for diagnosing and enhancing model behaviors. 

# References 

Assouel, R., Campbell, D., Bengio, Y., and Webb, T. Visual symbolic mechanisms: Emergent symbol pro-cessing in vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15871 , 2025. Belinkov, Y. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Computational Linguistics , 48(1):207–219, 2022. Campbell, D., Rane, S., Giallanza, T., De Sabbata, C. N., Ghods, K., Joshi, A., Ku, A., Frankland, S., Griffiths, T., Cohen, J. D., et al. Understanding the limits of vision language models through the lens of the binding problem. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 113436–113460, 2024. Chen, B., Xu, Z., Kirmani, S., Ichter, B., Sadigh, D., Guibas, L., and Xia, F. Spatialvlm: Endowing vision-language models with spatial reasoning capabilities. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 14455–14465, June 2024a. Chen, B., Xu, Z., Kirmani, S., Ichter, B., Sadigh, D., Guibas, L., and Xia, F. Spatialvlm: Endowing vision-language models with spatial reasoning capabilities. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 14455–14465, 2024b. Chen, J., Tang, J., Qin, J., Liang, X., Liu, L., Xing, E., and Lin, L. Geoqa: A geometric question answering benchmark towards multimodal numerical reasoning. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pp. 513–523, 2021. Chen, S., Zhu, T., Zhou, R., Zhang, J., Gao, S., Niebles, J. C., Geva, M., He, J., Wu, J., and Li, M. Why is spatial reasoning hard for vlms? an attention mecha-nism perspective on focus areas, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2503.01773 .Cheng, A.-C., Yin, H., Fu, Y., Guo, Q., Yang, R., Kautz, J., Wang, X., and Liu, S. Spatialrgpt: Grounded spatial reasoning in vision-language models. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 37:135062–135093, 2024. Cohen, I., Gottesman, D., Geva, M., and Giryes, R. Perfor-mance gap in entity knowledge extraction across modal-ities in vision language models, 2026. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2412.14133 .Dai, Q., Heinzerling, B., and Inui, K. Representational analysis of binding in language models. In Al-Onaizan, Y., Bansal, M., and Chen, Y.-N. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pp. 17468–17493, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main. 967. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024. emnlp-main.967/ .Davies, X., Nadeau, M., Prakash, N., Shaham, T. R., and Bau, D. Discovering variable binding circuitry with desiderata. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03637 , 2023. Feng, J. and Steinhardt, J. How do language models bind entities in context? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17191 ,2023. Geiger, A., Wu, Z., Lu, H., Rozner, J., Kreiss, E., Icard, T., Goodman, N., and Potts, C. Inducing causal structure for interpretable neural networks. In International Con-ference on Machine Learning , pp. 7324–7338. PMLR, 2022. 9The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Gholami, M., Rezaei, A., Weimin, Z., Mao, S., Zhou, S., Zhang, Y., and Akbari, M. Spatial reasoning with vision-language models in ego-centric multi-view scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.06266 , 2025. Goetting, D., Singh, H. G., and Loquercio, A. End-to-end navigation with vision language models: Transforming spatial reasoning into question-answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.05755 , 2024. Gur-Arieh, Y., Geva, M., and Geiger, A. Mixing mech-anisms: How language models retrieve bound entities in-context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06182 , 2025. Hasani, H., Izadi, A., Askari, F., Bagherian, M., Moham-madian, S., Izadi, M., and Baghshah, M. S. Uncovering grounding ids: How external cues shape multimodal bind-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24072 , 2025. Hewitt, J. and Manning, C. D. A structural probe for finding syntax in word representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,pp. 4129–4138, 2019. Jiang, N., Kachinthaya, A., Petryk, S., and Gandelsman, Y. Interpreting and editing vision-language representa-tions to mitigate hallucinations, 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2410.02762 .Jiang, N., Dravid, A., Efros, A., and Gandelsman, Y. Vision transformers don’t need trained registers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08010 , 2025. Kaduri, O., Bagon, S., and Dekel, T. What’s in the image? a deep-dive into the vision of vision language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 14549– 14558, June 2025. Kamath, A., Hessel, J., and Chang, K.-W. What’s” up” with vision-language models? investigating their struggle with spatial reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19785 ,2023a. Kamath, A., Hessel, J., and Chang, K.-W. What’s ”up” with vision-language models? investigating their struggle with spatial reasoning, 2023b. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2310.19785 .Kang, R., Chen, H., Gkioxari, G., and Perona, P. Linear mechanisms for spatiotemporal reasoning in vision lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.12626 , 2026. Ma, W., Chen, H., Zhang, G., Chou, Y.-C., Chen, J., de Melo, C., and Yuille, A. 3dsrbench: A comprehensive 3d spatial reasoning benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pp. 6924–6934, 2025. Meng, K., Bau, D., Andonian, A., and Belinkov, Y. Locat-ing and editing factual associations in GPT. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2022. arXiv:2202.05262. Neo, C., Ong, L., Torr, P., Geva, M., Krueger, D., and Barez, F. Towards interpreting visual information processing in vision-language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2410.07149 .Nikankin, Y., Arad, D., Gandelsman, Y., and Belinkov, Y. Same task, different circuits: Disentangling modality-specific mechanisms in vlms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09047 , 2025. Prakash, N., Shaham, T. R., Haklay, T., Belinkov, Y., and Bau, D. Fine-tuning enhances existing mecha-nisms: A case study on entity tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14811 , 2024. Prakash, N., Shapira, N., Sharma, A. S., Riedl, C., Be-linkov, Y., Shaham, T. R., Bau, D., and Geiger, A. Lan-guage models use lookbacks to track beliefs, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.14685 .Qin, Y., Varghese, D., Lindstr ¨om, A. D., Donatelli, L., Misra, K., and Kim, N. Vision-and-language training helps deploy taxonomic knowledge but does not fundamentally alter it. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13328 , 2025. Rott Shaham, T., Schwettmann, S., Wang, F., Rajaram, A., Hernandez, E., Andreas, J., and Torralba, A. A mul-timodal automated interpretability agent. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Saravanan, D., Tapaswi, M., and Gandhi, V. Investigating mechanisms for in-context vision language binding. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition Conference , pp. 4852–4856, 2025. Vig, J., Gehrmann, S., Belinkov, Y., Qian, S., Nevo, D., Singer, Y., and Shieber, S. Investigating gender bias in language models using causal mediation analysis. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 33: 12388–12401, 2020. Wen, C., Jayaraman, D., and Gao, Y. Can transformers capture spatial relations between objects?, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.00729 .Wen, C., Huang, Y., Huang, H., Huang, Y., Yuan, S., Hao, Y., Lin, H., Liu, Y.-S., and Fang, Y. Zero-shot object navigation with vision-language models reasoning. In 

International Conference on Pattern Recognition , pp. 389– 404. Springer, 2025. 10 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Zheng, X., Dongfang, Z., Jiang, L., Zheng, B., Guo, Y., Zhang, Z., Albanese, G., Yang, R., Ma, M., Zhang, Z., et al. Multimodal spatial reasoning in the large model era: A survey and benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.25760 , 2025. 11 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

# Appendix 

We bring here additional results and experimental details. 

# A. Data 

A.1. Models’ Accuracy 

Squares Shapes Objects What’sUp L R A B L R A B L R A B L RQwen2-VL-7B-Instruct 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.99 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.92 0.86 Gemma-3-4b-it 1.00 1.00 0.93 0.97 1.00 1.00 0.97 0.97 1.00 1.00 0.95 1.00 0.91 0.90 

Table 4. Full behavioral performance, according to queried directins (Left,Right,Above,bellow) 

Squares Shapes Objects L R A B L R A B L R A BQwen2-VL-7B-Instruct 0.85 0.60 0.43 0.50 0.76 0.65 0.53 0.52 0.47 0.43 0.31 0.50 Gemma-3-4b-it 0.49 0.47 0.62 0.59 0.53 0.47 0.70 0.58 0.44 0.56 0.46 0.76 

Table 5. Behavioral performance with visual embedding intervention, according to queried directins (Left,Right,Above,bellow) 

A.2. Image Settings 

Each of our settings consists of images constructed from the following possible objects: 

Squares: 

red , green , blue , black , brown , gray 

Shapes: 

red square , green circle , blue triangle , black star , brown cross , gray heart 

Objects: 

orange , apple , pot , bell , hat , rose , key , bomb 

(a) Square setting (b) Shapes setting (c) Objects setting 

Figure 10. Example images of the Square, Shapes, and Objects settings. 

For each model, we report the following parameters in Table 6. 12 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Model # Image tokens # Pixels / Token # Tokens / Object Object spacing Strip width 

Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct 12 × 12 28 × 28 2 × 2 2 4

Gemma-3-4b-it 16 × 16 56 × 56 3 × 3 3 3 

> Table 6. Image tokenization and spatial layout parameters for each model.

• # Image tokens : total number of image tokens in an image, as a square grid of num tokens × num tokens tokens. • # Pixels / Token : number of image pixels per token, as num pixels × num pixels pixels per token. • # Tokens / Object : the number of tokens each object in the image occupies. • Object spacing : the horizontal/vertical distance, in tokens, between adjacent objects in an image. • Strip width : the strip width, in tokens, used for interventions such as those in Fig. 7. 

A.3. Prompts 

Generation prompt tokens are added to the end of each prompt to signal the beginning of the assistant response. 

System prompt (all settings): 

You are a helpful assistant. You respond in one token. 

User prompt templates: 

Each <direction> ∈ { left , right , above , below } is mapped to a preposition: 

{left 7 → ‘‘to the left of’’, right 7 → ‘‘to the right of’’, above 7 → ‘‘above’’, below 7 → ‘‘below’’ }

Squares: 

The color of the square <preposition> the <middle color> square is 

Shapes: 

The color of the shape <preposition> the <middle color> is 

Objects: 

The object <preposition> the <middle object> is 

What’s Up (Objects): 

The object on the floor <preposition> the <middle object> is 

# B. Additional results 

B.1. Last Token Position Patching 

In addition to the results described in Section 5.1, we report the results of the last-token interchange intervention experiment on other settings (Shapes, Objects, and What’sUP) and models ( Gemma-3-4b-it ). Results are shown in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12. 

B.2. Vision Token Patching 

In this subsection, we present the results of the interchange intervention experiment described in Section 5.2.2. We report results for interventions that patch both the square and strip visual tokens for each model. The findings are shown in Fig. 14, Fig. 15, Fig. 13, and Fig. 16. In both cases, the results suggest that ordering information is not sufficiently encoded in the square visual token embeddings. In Fig. 18 and Fig. 17, we present additional patching results after removing vision encoder-generated ordering infor-mation from visual embeddings using the procedure from Section 5.3.1. Output switching occurs in intermediate layers, corroborating our finding that the LM backbone produces its own ordering information. Results are omitted when sufficient clean/counterfactual input pairs cannot be generated. 13 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models    

> Figure 11. Final token interchange intervention experiments with the Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct model.

B.3. Probing 

One of the main findings of this work is that ordering information from the vision encoder is not concentrated in a small set of square tokens; instead, it is distributed across neighboring background tokens as well. In this subsection, we present probing results across multiple settings and models, demonstrating the ubiquity of this phenomenon of diffused ordering information. Results are demonstrated in Fig. 19. Fig. 20, Fig. 21, Fig. 22, Fig. 23, and Fig. 24. We also show similar results with Gemma-3-4b-it in Fig. 25, Fig. 26, Fig. 27, Fig. 28, Fig. 29, and Fig. 30. 

B.4. Probing on grids 

We extend the probing results from subsection B.3 to grid configurations consisting of both horizontal and vertical relationships between objects, with findings presented in Fig. 31 and Fig. 32. Probes are trained on 2 × 2 token objects for 

Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct and 3 × 3 token objects for Gemma3-4b-it , with results exhibiting diffusion of positional information to surrounding tokens. 14 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models    

> Figure 12. Final token interchange intervention experiments with the Gemma-3-4b-it model.

B.5. Probing for What’sUp 

Finally, we also show that the ordering information is diffused across background tokens in real-world images from What’sUp. Training data is extracted from the embeddings within the bounding boxes outlined in Fig. 33. Results are consistent with previous findings, as illustrated in Fig. 35. 15 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 13. Visual token embeddings of square tokens interchange intervention experiment on Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct model. 

16 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 14. Visual token embeddings of square tokens interchange intervention experiment on Gemma-3-4b-it model. 

17 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 15. Visual token embeddings of strip tokens interchange intervention experiment on Gemma-3-4b-it model. 

18 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 16. Visual token embeddings of strip tokens interchange intervention experiment on Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct model. 

19 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 17. Visual embedding intervention, Qwen 

Figure 18. Visual embedding intervention, Gemma 

20 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 19. Horizontal position probe for square images, Qwen 

Figure 20. Vertical position probe for square images, Qwen 

Figure 21. Horizontal position probe for shape images, Qwen 

Figure 22. Vertical position probe for shape images, Qwen 

21 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 23. Horizontal position probe for object images, Qwen 

Figure 24. Vertical position probe for shape images, Qwen 

Figure 25. Horizontal position probe for square images, Gemma 

Figure 26. Vertical position probe for square images, Gemma 

22 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 27. Horizontal position probe for shape images, Gemma 

Figure 28. Vertical position probe for shape images, Gemma 

Figure 29. Horizontal position probe for object images, Gemma 

Figure 30. Vertical position probe for object images, Gemma 

23 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 31. Qwen and Gemma probing results on 2x2 shapes grid. 

Figure 32. Qwen and Gemma probing results on 3x3 shapes grid. 

24 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 33. Preprocessing for What’sUp images: constructing bounding boxes around each object. 

25 The Dual Mechanisms of Spatial Reasoning in Vision–Language Models 

Figure 34. Qwen What’sUp probe 

Figure 35. Gemma What’sUp probe 

26