Title: Out of Sight, Out of Mind? Evaluating State Evolution in Video World Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.13215v1

Published Time: Mon, 16 Mar 2026 01:25:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Out of Sight, Out of Mind? Evaluating State Evolution in Video World Models 

## Ziqi Ma ∗ Mengzhan Liufu ∗ Georgia Gkioxari California Institute of Technology Video Generation with Occlusion 

Video Generation with Camera Control 

insert occlusion 

turn camera right turn camera left 

Incorrect State Evolution 

(water level dropped) 

Figure 1. Today’s video world models “simulate” the world by generating pixels. We test whether they can separate state evolution from what’s visible by turning the camera away or adding in-scene occlusions. StEvo-Bench evaluates three key capabilities under lookaway/occlusion: whether evolution continues at all, whether it remains physically plausible, and whether the scene stays coherent. 

## Abstract 

Evolutions in the world, such as water pouring or ice melt-ing, happen regardless of being observed. Video world models generate “worlds” via 2D frame observations. Can these generated “worlds” evolve regardless of observation? To probe this question, we design a benchmark to evalu-ate whether video world models can decouple state evo-lution from observation. Our benchmark, StEvo-Bench ,applies observation control to evolving processes via in-structions of occluder insertion, turning off the light, or specifying camera “lookaway” trajectories. By evaluating video models with and without camera control for a di-verse set of naturally-occurring evolutions, we expose their limitations in decoupling state evolution from observation. 

StEvo-Bench proposes an evaluation protocol to automat-ically detect and disentangle failure modes of video world models across key aspects of natural state evolution. Anal-ysis of StEvo-Bench results provide new insight into poten-tial data and architecture bias of present-day video world models. Project website: https://glab-caltech. github.io/STEVOBench/ . Blog: https://ziqi-ma.github.io/blog/2026/outofsight/ 

> 1Equal contribution.

## 1. Introduction 

The world evolves regardless of whether we observe it or not. Consider Fig. 1. When water is being poured into a cup, the amount of water grows, regardless of whether the cup is observed. Fueled by the rapid progress in video generation, today’s world models can generate visual worlds via synthesizing image frames. These image frames, by depicting visual appearance, represent a world with objects and properties, forming the “world state”. As objects move or properties change, such as humans moving or fire burning, the “world state” evolves. In the real world, we know that these state evolutions are not dependent on observation – even if they are occluded, or out of view, the state evolves as expected. If video models are truly “world models”, they need to possess this property as well: states should correctly evolve, even if not observed. This is not merely an intellectual investigation. If we want our world models to generate larger worlds and enable longer-horizon interactions, the visible frame observation for any given moment becomes an increasingly small frac-tion of the generated world. In other words, the majority of the generated world is unobserved. Given this, it be-comes critical that the world models can continue evolving the world state, decoupled from observation. Decoupling evolution from observation has three implicit 1     

> arXiv:2603.13215v1 [cs.CV] 13 Mar 2026 Continuous
> Evolution
> Kinematics
> Relational
> Change
> State
> Transformation
> Expected Human
> & Animal Behavior
> Causal
> Change
> 26.7%
> 16.3%
> 16.3%
> 17.4%
> 12.8%
> 10.5%
> Initial Frame
> “a cereal box is slid in front
> of the glass and pitcher,
> completely blocking them
> from the camera view”
> right -30 left -30
> Instruction
> Video Model
> (e.g. Veo3)
> Camera -controlled
> Video Model
> (e.g. Genie3)
> “A hand tilts a pitcher over
> an empty glass, beginning
> to pour water into it”
> Occlusion
> Camera Control
> Verifier
> Benchmark Statistics
> State Progress
> Physics Plausibility
> Coherence
> Observation Control
> Action Control

Figure 2. StEvo-Bench probes whether video-based world models can decouple state evolution from observation. StEvo-Bench ,consisting of 225 unique tasks spanning 6 categories, uses (image, text prompt, camera control) tuples to prompt video-based world models to generate evolutions under interrupted observation. Observation interruption is done either using text prompt (such as adding occluders, turning off the light), or using camera control (turning the camera view away). The generated videos go through StEvo-Bench ’s automatic verifiers for evaluation. 

aspects: 1) The physical plausibility of state evolution: For example, does the water flow correctly based on gravity, and do glass containers not penetrate each other? 2) Coherence of non-evolving aspects: For example, do the cup and jug have the same material and size across the video, without abrupt change or disappearance? 3) The progress of state evolution while not being observed: For example, when the camera turns away and back while the water is still pouring, does water level grow? Benchmarks define the goal posts for model development, yet existing ones do not support this critical aspect of video world models. Prior benchmarks of world models touch upon 1) and 2). For example, intuitive physics benchmarks like [3, 4, 20] focus on 1) for physical processes. Consis-tency benchmarks like [30], or consistency subcategories of [6, 10, 36], focus on 2) under full observation. Memory benchmarks like [34] involve less-than-full observation, but only focus on coherence for static settings. Current bench-marks, even when combined, only cover 1) and 2), and thus cannot support the growth of world models towards big-ger worlds, longer horizon, which naturally introduces more processes that cannot be observed in their full duration. We present a benchmark which evaluates all three aspects to verify whether video world models can decouple state evo-lution from observation. Our benchmark, StEvo-Bench ,inserts occlusions or directs the camera to look away during an evolving process. For example, we let the model generate a burning match, and then either insert an occlusion in front of the camera or control the camera to turn away while the match is burning. When the camera turns back or the occlu-sion is removed, we evaluate whether the match has burned more than previously seen. We focus on video world mod-els, which include image(text)-to-video models and camera-controlled video models. StEvo-Bench contains 225 tasks, encompassing six evolution categories: continuous process, kinematics, relational change, causal change, state transfor-mation, and expected human/animal behavior. To enable au-tomatic evaluation, StEvo-Bench also introduces specialist verifiers built upon VLMs, which automatically evaluate and disentangle critical failure modes. 

StEvo-Bench allows us to probe how world models han-dle evolving processes when observation stops, exposing interesting findings about these models. For video models [8, 11, 21, 28, 33], we find that general-purpose video gener-ation models exhibit evolution stopping or incoherence when observation control (such as occlusion or turning off the light) is applied. For camera-controlled models [7, 25, 26], we notice a strong bias toward static scenes (no evolution) and increased difficulty in camera control when the models are able to evolve state. We further find that memory-based architectures exacerbate the static-scene bias, and does not help decouple evolution from observation. These findings motivate further investigations about data and architecture bias of current video world models. We make the following contributions: 

• We propose StEvo-Bench , a benchmark to measure whether world models can decouple state evolution from observation. 

• We build automatic specialist verifiers to detect and disen-tangle various axes of failure in state evolutions generated by video world models. 

• Quantitative analysis on StEvo-Bench reveals critical findings about current state-of-the-art video world models. 

## 2. Related Works 

Video World Models. With the rapid progress in video gen-eration, people started to term video models “world models” due to their capability to generate realistic-looking worlds via video frames. Video “world models” can be catego-rized into two types: The first type is general-purpose video generation models, such as [8, 11, 21, 28, 33, 38], which can generate worlds based on image or text prompts. The other type is action-conditioned video models [5, 7, 25, 26], which generate videos semi-autoregressively, conditioned on actions. Many works focus on camera control (i.e. navi-2Evolution criteria Control criteria 

Category Progress Physics Coherence Observation Action Physics & Common sense [3, 4, 13, 15] ✓ ✓ ✕ ✕ ✕

Memory & consistency [23, 30, 34] ✕ ✕ ✓ ✓ ✕

Instruction following [6, 36] ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✓

StEvo-Bench ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓    

> Table 1. Evaluating state evolution decoupled from observation requires multiple criteria. While prior benchmarks for video (world) models only touch on subsets of them,, StEvo-Bench comprehensively evaluates all aspects to expose and disentangle failure modes of world models when generating evolutions that are not fully observed.

gation) as action [5, 7, 25, 26]. Action space could also be robotic end effector space [1], or time plus camera control [29]. While the definition of “world models” can be broad, in this work, we focus on general-domain world models of the two types above. 

World Models Evaluation. Early evaluations of video models focus on video quality and general condition-consistency [10]. However, using video models to gen-erate realistic “worlds”, rather than just visually-pleasing videos, poses additional requirements, such as physics cor-rectness, common sense, controllability, and dynamics. General world model benchmarks such as WorldScore [6], WorldModelBench[13] test these aspects in simple settings. Among specialized benchmarks, VideoPhy [3], VideoPhy2 [4] and PAIBench [39] focus on physics realism, World Con-sistency Score [23], Stable World [12] and MIND [34] fo-cus on consistency and memory. In this work, we evalu-ate whether world models can successfully evolve processes without full observation, presenting a more rigorous test of physical plausibility and coherence compounded with the challenges of interrupted observation. 

State in World Models. Some prior works propose a “state-ful” world model that carries an implicit world state repre-sentation. Such a formulation, by definition, decouples the state’s evolution from observation. Prior works in this di-rection can be categorized by their different state represen-tations: memory as state, 2.5D/3D as state, and latent state. WorldMem [32], VMem [14], and Long-term Spatial Mem-ory [31] represent the world state as memory. WonderPlay [17], VerseCrafter [37], and Point World[9] use depth point cloud or 3D representations as the “world state”. These states, either memory-based or 3D-based, strongly bias to-wards static scenes. Finally, works like Dino-WM [40], V-JEPA2 [2], Long-context SSM [22], and FloWM [18] use a latent world state. FloWM discusses latent state evo-lution in simple, synthetic environments like block world. While prior works on stateful world models are generally constrained in simple, synthetic environments, we design a method to probe the “statefulness” in general-purpose video-based world models. 

## 3. Benchmarking State Evolution in Video World Models 

StEvo-Bench evaluates whether video world models can continue scene evolution when not the whole process is in view. It consists of 225 unique tasks, spanning 6 differ-ent categories of naturally-occurring evolutions, including continuous process, kinematics, relational change, causal change, state transformation, and expected human/animal behavior. The tasks reflect physical events that real-world agents routinely observe: a hand turns on a stove burner and a wet pan begins to heat, a pitcher pours water into a glass, a wall switch is toggled and a lamp turns on, a tire pump inflates a deflated tire, a railroad crossing gate descends as a train approaches, or a hand turns a manual valve and a sprinkler activates. The diversity of tasks and their ground-ing in everyday physical interactions make StEvo-Bench 

directly relevant to the challenges faced by embodied agents deployed in the real world. 

3.1. Task Construction 

Tasks in StEvo-Bench require world models to generate a continuous process evolution under interrupted observation (Fig. 2). Each task is specified by an initial image and a text prompt. The initial image shows a main object in its initial state. The text prompt instructs the world model to apply two controls : an action control that initiates an evolution process of the main object ( e.g ., hand tips over the first domino), and an observation control that interrupts observation of the process mid-evolution. We evaluate the state of the main object before and after observation of it is interrupted. We implement observation control in a model-specific way. For video generation models, the text prompt instructs the model to apply an in-scene observation interruption for some prolonged period and then remove it to reveal the main object again. That is either a physical occluder placed in front of the camera ( e.g . a piece of cardboard or curtains) or removing all illumination ( e.g . turning lights off). For camera-controlled video models, we specify a camera tra-jectory that moves the main object fully out of frame and then 3State Progress 

> Does the intended
> dynamic process
> take place at all?
> Is the process
> continuous?
> Does the object
> state reset at any
> point?
> Physical Plausibilit y
> No object deform or
> merge into each
> other?
> No object moves
> without physical
> cause?
> No object floats
> without support or
> attachment?
> Coherence
> No object teleports
> or disappears?
> No abrupt
> introduction of new
> objects?
> No scene cuts,
> resets or jumps?
> Observation Control
> Does the
> observation control
> happen at all?
> Does it make the
> main object fully
> invisible?
> Does the main
> object stay invisible
> for long?
> Action Control
> Does the requested
> motion happen at
> all?
> Does the motion
> initiate the intended
> cause & effect?
> Evolution verif iers Control verif iers

Figure 3. Automatic verifier pipeline for StEvo-Bench . Five video understanding verifiers independently assess each generated video on one criteria. Observation Control and Action Control jointly determine Control Success; State Progress, Physics Plausibility, and Coherence jointly determine Evolution Success. 

returns to bring it back in view ( e.g ., “right-30 steps, left-30 steps”). In both cases, the final revealed view indicates whether the state of the main object has evolved correctly during the interval it was out of sight. These strategies are tailored to each model’s control interface to ensure reliable observation interruption. 

3.2. Evaluation Criteria and Automatic Verifiers 

StEvo-Bench evaluates generated videos using a two-stage pipeline. First, we check control success : whether the model applied both controls — the observation control successfully hid the scene, and the action control successfully initiated the process. Tasks that fail these control criteria are excluded from further evaluation, since without successful controls the process is either uninitiated or not partially observed. On the passing subset, we evaluate task success , which re-quires three evolution criteria to hold: state progress (did the process qualitatively occur during occlusion?), physical plausibility (is the evolution physically correct?), and coher-ence (does the video remain temporally consistent before and after occlusion?). A video achieves task success only if it first achieves control success and then passes all three evolution criteria. Previous benchmarks focus on a subset of these aspects, as shown in Tab. 1. StEvo-Bench evaluates all these as-pects to comprehensively quantify state evolution success and disentangle various failure modes. To evaluate these criteria automatically, we build a specialist verifier that produces a single binary judgment (Fig. 3). All verifiers use Gemini 3.1 Pro as the VLM judge. Decomposing verification into independent special-ists serves two purposes: (1) It enables fine-grained diagno-sis of why a model fails, since current video models often exhibit multiple entangled failure modes in a single gen-eration; (2) Each verifier poses a single, narrowly scoped yes/no question, which produces more reliable VLM judg-ments than a monolithic prompt that asks the VLM to simul-taneously weigh and disentangle multiple aspects of success. This observation is consistent with findings in prior work on checklist-style prompting [27]. 

Control verifiers. The two control verifiers check whether the model correctly applied the requested controls: 

Observation control verifier: verifies whether the scene was successfully hidden during the evolution, either by an in-scene occluder (cardboard, curtains, or lights off) or by a camera lookaway. The verifier checks that the main object was completely blocked from view for a sustained duration while the process was underway. Partial or transient occlu-sion, and occlusion that occurs only after the evolution has already completed, are both considered unsuccessful. 

Action control verifier: verifies that the requested action event both occurred and took effect. This requires the motion itself to be visible, and it must also correctly initiate the expected physical response. In the case of the requested action being “finger tips over the first domino”, the tipping motion must occur, and it must cause the first domino to tilt over. A completely absent tipping motion, or tipping in mid-ar, are both consider failures by this verifier. 

Evolution verifiers. If a generated video passes the control verifiers, then three evolution verifiers check whether the world state evolved correctly in the video: 

State progress verifier: verifies whether the intended state change progresses at all during occlusion or lookaway, re-gardless of physical accuracy or completeness. The key question here is whether the process evolves continuously, as opposed to (a) remaining completely static, (b) discon-tinued during the unobserved period, or (c) having undone 4itself during the unobserved period. This verifier first uses the VLM’s reasoning to predict, in language, what direc-tional change the evolution should produce, then uses a unanimous-vote ensemble ( 𝑛 = 3) of video understanding models to decide whether that change progressed correctly during the unobserved period. 

Physical plausibility verifier: verifies that the evolution is physically correct. The verifier prompt covers a two-type taxonomy of violations: Type 1 covers instantaneous single-frame violations ( e.g ., rigid objects deformed without force, objects floating against gravity); Type 2 covers dynamic vi-olations where a cause is shown but the wrong effect follows (e.g., smoke sinks downward instead of rising). We prompt the verifier to flag only active violations, not the simple lack of change, to avoid conflating a missing evolution with an incorrect one. The same majority-vote ensemble approach was used to suppress hallucinations 

Coherence verifier: verifies that the video is temporally consistent before and after occlusion, both in the main object and the broader scene. Each instance in a majority-vote ensemble ( 𝑛 = 3) applies a structured checklist: Does the main object vanish with no physical cause? Does it teleport to an unexplained position? Does any new object appear abruptly? Does the scene cut, reset, or resume in a noticeably different configuration? The video passes only if none of the above occurs. 

## 4. Do Video World Models Evolve State Suc-cessfully? 

StEvo-Bench allows us to probe whether video models can successfully evolve states when part of the dynamic process is occluded or out-of-view. 

4.1. Model Candidates 

We evaluate both video models which generate videos con-ditioned on image and text, as well as camera-controlled video models which additionally takes in a specified camera trajectory. 

Video Models. We evaluate open- and closed-source general-purpose video generative models, including Veo 3 [8], Sora 2 Pro [21], WAN 2.2 [28], CogVideoX 1.5 [33] and HunyuanVideo 1.5 [11]. 

Camera-controlled Video Models. We evaluate state-of-the-art camera- controlled video models, including Genie 3 [7], HunyuanWorld 1.0 [25], LingBot-World [26], GEN3C [24], VMem [14], and AETHER [42]. Among these mod-els, Hunyuan-WorldPlay, Lingbot are open-source general camera-conditioned video models. GEN3C incorporates 3D priors, VMem incorporates a memory module, and AETHER pretrains on 4D reconstruction objective. Since VMem always creates severe visual artifacts during camera pan, and AETHER “forgets” the object before camera turn due to its short, 41-frame context, we only evaluate them qualitatively. 

4.2. Findings 

Can video world models decouple state evolution from observation? Tab. 2 quantitatively evaluates whether video models can successfully evolve states on StEvo-Bench 

tasks, as well as their subgoal performance. Finding 1: Both video models and camera-controlled video models struggle to decouple state evolution from observation. As seen in Tab. 2, both video models and camera-controlled video models show less than 10% success rate in evolving state under interrupted observation. While closed-source video models such as Veo 3 and Sora 2 Pro can oc-casionally evolve the process (state progress rate being 17% and 13% respectively), they often fail to maintain coherence and physical plausibility. Camera-controlled models almost never evolve states, with less than 5% state progress across closed- and open-source models. We present findings about these models’ specific failure modes in the analysis below. 

How do video models fail under observation control? 

StEvo-Bench exposes two key failure modes of video mod-els when observation control is applied to these models: evolution stopping and incoherence. Fig. 4 highlights both failure modes. Finding 2: When observation control ( e.g ., occlu-sions or “turn light off”) is introduced into an evolv-ing process, video models often stall the evolution or exhibit incoherence. 

Evolution stopping. A common failure mode is stalled state evolution. For instance, in Fig. 4, an air mattress with an open valve should continue deflating; yet when we instruct the model to “turn off the light”, the mattress stops deflating. Our state progress verifier detects this issue. As shown in Tab. 2, all video models have low state progress rates, with open-source models particularly prone to this failure mode. 

Incoherence. A second common failure mode is loss of object coherence once an occluder disappears – for example, the rectangular sponge becoming round in Fig. 4. The co-herence verifier captures these errors, with state-of-the-art closed-source models achieving only about a 60% success rate. To further understand whether such failures are indeed caused by the observation control, we perform additional 5Model Success Progress Physics Coherence Video models  Veo 3 8.7 17.4 82.6 66.5 Sora 2 Pro 8.1 13.1 85.5 69.7 

WAN 2.2 0.9 7.7 52 58.4 HY-Video 1.5 0.9 4.1 42.1 59.1 CogVideoX 1.5 0.5 1.4 68.5 67.1 Camera-controlled  Genie 3 0.0 2.9 15.2 27.3 HY-WorldPlay 0.0 0.0 72.2 88.2 

Lingbot 0.0 3.4 40.7 76.3 GEN3C 0.0 0.0 30.6 82.4 

Table 2. Evaluation metrics for video models (top) and camera-controlled models (bottom). Both video models and camera-controlled video models struggle to evolve state correctly when observation control is applied. Metrics are in percentage (%). Observation Interruption 

light off 

Mattress not 

deflating 

# pouring water onto sponge 

# Full Observability 

# air mattress with an open valve 

Sponge 

turned round 

Cardboard occlusion 

Figure 4. Representative failure modes of video models when observation of the evolution process is interrupted. The model is capable of simulating the process correctly when the scene is fully visible. However, when observation of the process is temporarily interrupted, the model either stops evolving state, as seen in the mattress deflation example, or fails to preserve object coherence, as seen in the sponge example. These videos are generated by Veo 3. Progress Success 

Observ. Full 84.6 46.2 Observ. Control 17.4 12.4 

Table 3. The effect of observation control: state progress rate and task success rate drop significantly when observation control is applied. Metrics are averaged over Veo 3 and Sora 2 Pro. 

experiments where the observation control is not inserted, 

i.e ., the process evolves while fully observed. As seen in Fig. 4, both these processes succeed when there is no oc-cluder or “light off” intervention. Tab. 3 provides further quantitative evidence that when observation control is ap-plied, both the state progress rate (which measures whether the state progressed during the occlusion) and task success rate (which measures whether the full evolution is correct and coherent) are significantly lower. The success of full-observability generation suggests that models possesses internal knowledge of how the process should evolve. However, observation control renders these models incapable of generating these processes correctly. While one might argue that this problem is solvable by incor-porating large-scale occlusion-interrupted dynamics videos into training, we believe such failures expose fundamental issues on how video models process context. Since the oc-cluding frames do not provide any useful information on the state evolution, naive all-to-all bidirectional attention might not be efficient in such cases. We hope these failure cases can inspire and motivate new architecture designs for video world models. 

How do camera-controlled video models fail under ob-servation control? 

6turn camera right turn camera left 

turn camera right turn camera left 

Ball did not drop 

Wave did not 

advance 

turn camera right turn camera left 

Tablet did not 

drop 

Scene incoherent 

Lingbot 

WorldPla y

AETHER Figure 5. Open-source camera-controlled video models assume the scene to be static as the camera turns, and fail to correctly evolve state, such as the ball dropping, wave advancing, or tablet dropping. 

Finding 3: Camera-controlled video models tend to “freeze” the scene and fail to continue the dynamic process. 

Camera-controlled models, when instructed to “look away” from a process, largely fail to evolve the process, and tend to keep the scene static as the camera moves. We observe similar behavior across models, especially open-source models like Hunyuan-WorldPlay, Lingbot, and GEN3C. This is also seen in the close-to-zero state progress rate for all camera-controlled models in Tab. 2. Fig. 5 shows representative failures of such models, sourced from Hunyuan-WorldPlay and Lingbot. GEN3C, which leverages 3D cache to enhance camera control, biases strongly toward static scene generation. AETHER, a camera-controlled video which mixes in 4D reconstruction objective during training, is also unable to evolve state, and fails to remember the object due to the its short context window. Finding 4: When camera-controlled video models successfully evolve the state, camera control be-comes difficult. The previous finding states that camera-controlled mod-els frequently generate static worlds. In the less frequent event where they do generate dynamics, we observe that camera control becomes difficult. When state evolution is being generated, the model largely ignores the camera con-trol and keeps the camera static. Fig. 6 shows two represen-tative examples. In both cases, the user continuously directs the camera to turn right. In the first example, while the rocket launches, the camera does not turn right but slightly turns up to follow the rocket. In the second example, the camera stays completely static despite the camera trajectory input. While previous findings focus on whether observation control makes evolution difficult, these failure modes show the converse is also true: evolution makes camera control difficult. These behaviors show another aspect of the evolution-observation coupling: the inability for camera pan and state evolution to happen concurrently suggests a strong coupling between the model’s capability to evolve state and gener-ating full pixel descriptions of the process from a largely unchanged viewpoint. We hypothesize that both the camera-controlled models’ bias towards static scene and the tradeoff between dynamics and camera control they exhibit might be attributed to the training data. These models usually train on a combination of general video data, rendered 3D data, and gaming data: 

• In order to obtain diverse camera trajectories, camera-controlled models train on rendered videos of static scenes. For example, WorldPlay trains on renderings of reconstructed 3D Gaussian Splats, and LingBot trains on 7turn camera right 

Camera control failed 

(not looking right) 

turn camera right 

Genie 3 Lingbot Figure 6. When camera-controlled models can successfully evolve states, the model tends to ignore camera control while the evolution is happening. Such behavior is seen both in Genie 3 and Lingbot. turn camera right turn camera left 

## Ball did not roll 

## down 

> Figure 7. Qualitative example of VMem. Due to the memory design, VMem can perfectly recall the initial frame, but fails to evolve state, and suffers from scene incoherence.

scene renderings from Unreal Engine. These videos move the camera but do not contain dynamics, which might re-inforce the static bias, and furthermore associate complex camera movement with static scenes. 

• The general video datasets that models train on, e.g ., Sekai [16] and DL3DV [19], mainly contain indoor and outdoor scenes with many static objects. 

• The gaming data, which contain (action, video) pairs, usu-ally don’t contain rich, natural physical evolutions that occur in the real world. Enabling simultanous state evolution and camera con-trol in world models might require different synthetic data strategies to mitigate data bias or post-training with prefer-ence optimization. 

Do memory modules help decouple state evolution from observation? Previous findings have shown that video world models have strong coupling between evolution and observation. We further study whether memory modules, which enable the model to keep track of a “memory state” separate from pixel-level generations, can help decouple state evolution from observation. While many memory-based architectures [32, 35] are constrained to specialized domains such as Minecraft or RealEstate10k [41], we evaluate VMem [14], which is the most general-domain memory-based model, trained on in-door and outdoor scenes. Finding 5: Memory-based video world models re-inforce the bias toward static scene. As shown in Fig. 7, VMem shows a strong bias toward remembering objects exactly “as is”. VMem, although pro-ducing artifacts during the camera lookaway process, is able to recall the initial frame quite accurately due to the memory design. We argue that while memory enables the model to store a “state” that is decoupled from observation, the archi-tecture design encourages memorization of object appear-ance, rather than enabling better modeling of state evolu-tion. StEvo-Bench highlights the need for new architecture designs to enable not only memorization, but also evolution of the world that is not always fully in-view. 

## 5. Control and Verifier Analysis 

5.1. Control success rate 

One predicate of our evaluation is that both observation and action control are applied correctly, i.e ., the process is correctly initiated, and occlusion or lookaway happen. We verify that current models can support such control by eval-uating success rate under each axis. Tab. 5 shows that video 8Evolution criteria Control criteria        

> Metric Progress Physics Coherence Success Observation Action Success

V-H 

Acc 0.795 0.700 0.860 0.810 0.878 0.903 0.849 

ROC-AUC 0.644 0.672 0.864 0.713 0.800 0.918 0.785 

MRA 0.829 0.743 0.905 0.858 0.891 0.949 0.857 H-H 

Acc 0.747 0.722 0.911 0.737 0.659 0.885 0.692 ROC-AUC 0.623 0.645 0.629 0.602 0.668 0.782 0.708 MRA 0.807 0.757 0.919 0.820 0.825 0.868 0.824      

> Table 4. Agreement between the automatic verifiers and the human annotators, benchmarked against inter-human agreement across three metrics. Bold indicates the higher value per column. The V-H row shows agreement between the verifiers and human annotators, and the
> H-H shows agreement within the human annotators.

Model Observ. Action Video models  Veo 3 81.6 88.0 

Sora 2 Pro 69.4 80.4 WAN 2.2 46.2 76.5 HY-Video 1.5 31.2 81.0 CogVideoX 1.5 22.2 75.5 Camera-controlled  Genie 3 84.7 78.6 

HY-WorldPlay 55.4 64.9 Lingbot 35.6 67.8 GEN3C 90.6 57.6   

> Table 5. Success rate of observation and action control. Models are largely able to follow control of StEvo-Bench tasks.

models and camera-controlled video models can correctly apply both observation and action control, validating the evaluation protocol of StEvo-Bench .

5.2. Evaluation of verifiers against human annota-tors 

The automatic verifiers are only useful if they reliably cap-ture the intended evaluation criteria. Since visually judging diverse videos is a subjective task, we validate the verifiers by comparing them to human annotations. If a verifier agrees with human annotators at least as well as annotators agree with each other, it is performing at the ceiling of what any automatic system could reasonably achieve. We recruited three crowdsourced annotators on Upwork and collect bi-nary labels (yes/no) for all five evaluation criteria. We do this on a randomly selected subset ( 𝑛 = 180) of the generated videos spanning all models. We measure agreement using three complementary met-rics. Accuracy is the fraction of tasks where two raters assign the same binary label, averaged over all rater pairs. 

ROC-AUC addresses potential label class imbalance. Given two raters, one is treated as ground truth and the other as predictor. Since predictions are binary (not soft scores), the ROC curve has only one interior point, so AUC reduces to (TPR + TNR )/ 2, where TPR is the fraction of ground-truth positives the predictor labels positive, and 𝑇 𝑁 𝑅 is the fraction of ground-truth negatives the predictor labels negative. For verifier-vs-human comparisons, the human is treated as ground truth. For human-vs-human compar-isons, both directions are computed for each pair and av-eraged symmetrically, since neither annotator is privileged. 

Model ranking agreement (MRA) sidesteps abso-lute calibration entirely: for every pair of models ( 𝐴, 𝐵 ) and every shared task, it asks whether two raters agree on which model performed better. Agreement is scored as 1.0 for a full match, 0.5 when one rater calls a tie and the other does not, and 0.0 for a reversal; scores are averaged over all model pairs and tasks. All three metrics produce values between 0 and 1, with 1 being perfect agreement. The agreement results are shown in Tab. 4. All three metrics converge on consistent conclu-sions. Human agreement is lowest on physical plausibility and observation control. This reflects genuine ambiguity in the definitions of these conflated, inter-related failure modes. Deciding whether a physical effect constitutes a jarring vi-olation (rather than a slow or imperfect evolution) requires nuanced domain knowledge, and different annotators apply different thresholds. Similarly, judging whether an occlu-sion was “complete enough” is subjective. Nevertheless, the verifier matches or exceeds inter-human agreement on nearly all criteria. The verifier-vs-human MRA 

meets or exceeds inter-human MRA on every single crite-ria. With Accuracy , the verifier outperforms inter-human agreement when evaluating state progress, observation con-trol and action control. The only criteria where the verifier lags slightly is physical plausibility, which is also the hardest for humans. Together, these results confirm that our auto-matic verifiers are reliable proxies for well-educated human judgment: they agree with individual human annotators as 9well as annotators agree with each other, and they recover the same model ordering that a human panel would produce. 

## 6. Conclusions 

We present StEvo-Bench , a benchmark that evaluates whether video world models can evolve state correctly when observation is interrupted. We probe this by applying obser-vation control, either as occlusions or illumination dimming for video models, or as “lookaway” camera commands for camera-controlled video models. StEvo-Bench exposes that video world models struggle to evolve state when the observation control is applied. StEvo-Bench ’s verifiers disentangle various failure modes to deepen our understand-ing of the limitations of today’s video models. Evalua-tion on StEvo-Bench yields interesting findings, such as video models’ evolution stopping and incoherence failures, camera-controlled models’ strong bias towards static scenes, and the increased difficulty in camera control when a dy-namic evolution is present. These findings lead us to reflect on the training data and architecture design of video world models, such as training data bias the efficacy of memory-based architectures. StEvo-Bench makes the first step to-ward evaluating the non-pixel-based “world evolution” as-pect of world models. We hope StEvo-Bench inspires new techniques and architectures that enable video world models to truly model processes in the world, and not just generate coherent pixels. 

## 7. Acknowledgments 

We thank Aadarsh Sahoo and Damiano Marsili for valuable discussions. Ziqi Ma is funded by CAST. Mengzhan Liufu is supported by the Cherng fellowship. Georgia acknowledges the William Hurt Scholarship program for their support. We also thank Google for generously providing us with Gemini credits. 

## References 

[1] Arslan Ali, Junjie Bai, Maciej Bala, Yogesh Balaji, Aaron Blakeman, Tiffany Cai, Jiaxin Cao, Tianshi Cao, Elizabeth Cha, Yu-Wei Chao, et al. World simulation with video founda-tion models for physical ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.00062 ,2025. 3 [2] Mido Assran, Adrien Bardes, David Fan, Quentin Garrido, Russell Howes, Matthew Muckley, Ammar Rizvi, Claire Roberts, Koustuv Sinha, Artem Zholus, et al. V-jepa 2: Self-supervised video models enable understanding, predic-tion and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09985 , 2025. 3[3] Hritik Bansal, Zongyu Lin, Tianyi Xie, Zeshun Zong, Michal Yarom, Yonatan Bitton, Chenfanfu Jiang, Yizhou Sun, Kai-Wei Chang, and Aditya Grover. Videophy: Evaluating phys-ical commonsense for video generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 2, 3 [4] Hritik Bansal, Clark Peng, Yonatan Bitton, Roman Golden-berg, Aditya Grover, and Kai-Wei Chang. Videophy-2: A challenging action-centric physical commonsense evaluation in video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06800 , 2025. 2, 3 [5] Amir Bar, Gaoyue Zhou, Danny Tran, Trevor Darrell, and Yann LeCun. Navigation world models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 15791–15801, 2025. 2, 3 [6] Haoyi Duan, Hong-Xing Yu, Sirui Chen, Li Fei-Fei, and Jiajun Wu. Worldscore: A unified evaluation benchmark for world generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 27713–27724, 2025. 2, 3 [7] Google DeepMind. Genie 3: A new frontier for world mod-els. https://deepmind.google/blog/genie-3-a-new-frontier-for-world-models/ , 2025. Ac-cessed: 2026-03-03. 2, 3, 5 [8] Google DeepMind. Veo: a text-to-video generation system. 

https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/veo/Veo-3-Tech-Report.pdf , 2025. Ac-cessed: 2026-03-03. 2, 5 [9] Wenlong Huang, Yu-Wei Chao, Arsalan Mousavian, Ming-Yu Liu, Dieter Fox, Kaichun Mo, and Li Fei-Fei. Pointworld: Scaling 3d world models for in-the-wild robotic manipula-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03782 , 2026. 3 [10] Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Yuanhan Zhang, Tianxing Wu, Qingyang Jin, Nattapol Chanpaisit, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. VBench: Com-prehensive benchmark suite for video generative models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition , 2024. 2, 3 [11] Weijie Kong, Qi Tian, Zijian Zhang, Rox Min, Zuozhuo Dai, Jin Zhou, Jiangfeng Xiong, Xin Li, Bo Wu, Jianwei Zhang, et al. Hunyuanvideo: A systematic framework for large video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03603 , 2024. 2, 5 [12] Soonwoo Kwon, Jin-Young Kim, Hyojun Go, and Kyungjune Baek. Toward stable world models: Measuring and address-ing world instability in generative environments. Pattern Recognition , page 113351, 2026. 3 [13] Dacheng Li, Yunhao Fang, Yukang Chen, Shuo Yang, Shiyi Cao, Justin Wong, Michael Luo, Xiaolong Wang, Hongxu Yin, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, Song Han, and Yao Lu. Worldmodelbench: Judging video generation models as world models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. 3 [14] Runjia Li, Philip Torr, Andrea Vedaldi, and Tomas Jakab. Vmem: Consistent interactive video scene generation with surfel-indexed view memory. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 25690–25699, 2025. 3, 5, 8 [15] Xinyi Li, Zaishuo Xia, Weyl Lu, Chenjie Hao, and Yubei Chen. Smallworlds: Assessing dynamics understanding of world models in isolated environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.23465 , 2025. 3 

10 [16] Zhen Li, Chuanhao Li, Xiaofeng Mao, Shaoheng Lin, Ming Li, Shitian Zhao, Zhaopan Xu, Xinyue Li, Yukang Feng, Jianwen Sun, Zizhen Li, Fanrui Zhang, Jiaxin Ai, Zhixiang Wang, Yuwei Wu, Tong He, Jiangmiao Pang, Yu Qiao, Yunde Jia, and Kaipeng Zhang. Sekai: A video dataset towards world exploration, 2025. 8 [17] Zizhang Li, Hong-Xing Yu, Wei Liu, Yin Yang, Charles Her-rmann, Gordon Wetzstein, and Jiajun Wu. Wonderplay: Dy-namic 3d scene generation from a single image and actions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 9080–9090, 2025. 3 [18] Hansen Jin Lillemark, Benhao Huang, Fangneng Zhan, Yilun Du, and Thomas Anderson Keller. Flow equivariant world models: Memory for partially observed dynamic environ-ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.01075 , 2026. 3 [19] Lu Ling, Yichen Sheng, Zhi Tu, Wentian Zhao, Cheng Xin, Kun Wan, Lantao Yu, Qianyu Guo, Zixun Yu, Yawen Lu, et al. Dl3dv-10k: A large-scale scene dataset for deep learning-based 3d vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 22160– 22169, 2024. 8 [20] Chak-Wing Mak, Guanyu Zhu, Boyi Zhang, Hongji Li, Xi-aowei Chi, Kevin Zhang, Yichen Wu, Yangfan He, Chun-Kai Fan, Wentao Lu, Kuangzhi Ge, Xinyu Fang, Hongyang He, Kuan Lu, Tianxiang Xu, Li Zhang, Yongxin Ni, Youhua Li, and Shanghang Zhang. Physicsmind: Sim and real mechan-ics benchmarking for physical reasoning and prediction in foundational vlms and world models, 2026. 2 [21] OpenAI. Sora 2. https://openai.com/index/ sora-2/ , 2025. Accessed: 2026-03-03. 2, 5 [22] Ryan Po, Yotam Nitzan, Richard Zhang, Berlin Chen, Tri Dao, Eli Shechtman, Gordon Wetzstein, and Xun Huang. Long-context state-space video world models. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 8733–8744, 2025. 3 [23] Akshat Rakheja, Aarsh Ashdhir, Aryan Bhattacharjee, and Vanshika Sharma. World consistency score: A uni-fied metric for video generation quality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00144 , 2025. 3 [24] Xuanchi Ren, Tianchang Shen, Jiahui Huang, Huan Ling, Yifan Lu, Merlin Nimier-David, Thomas M¨ uller, Alexan-der Keller, Sanja Fidler, and Jun Gao. Gen3c: 3d-informed world-consistent video generation with precise camera con-trol. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6121–6132, 2025. 5 [25] Wenqiang Sun, Haiyu Zhang, Haoyuan Wang, Junta Wu, Zehan Wang, Zhenwei Wang, Yunhong Wang, Jun Zhang, Tengfei Wang, and Chunchao Guo. Worldplay: Towards long-term geometric consistency for real-time interactive world modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.14614 , 2025. 2, 3, 5 [26] Robbyant Team, Zelin Gao, Qiuyu Wang, Yanhong Zeng, Jiapeng Zhu, Ka Leong Cheng, Yixuan Li, Hanlin Wang, Yinghao Xu, Shuailei Ma, Yihang Chen, Jie Liu, Yansong Cheng, Yao Yao, Jiayi Zhu, Yihao Meng, Kecheng Zheng, Qingyan Bai, Jingye Chen, Zehong Shen, Yue Yu, Xing Zhu, Yujun Shen, and Hao Ouyang. Advancing open-source world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20540 , 2026. 2, 3, 5 [27] Vijay Viswanathan, Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Xiang Kong, Meng Cao, Graham Neubig, and Tongshuang Wu. Checklists are better than reward models for aligning language models. In NeurIPS , 2025. 4 [28] Team Wan, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianx-iao Yang, Jianyuan Zeng, Jiayu Wang, Jingfeng Zhang, Jin-gren Zhou, Jinkai Wang, Jixuan Chen, Kai Zhu, Kang Zhao, Keyu Yan, Lianghua Huang, Mengyang Feng, Ningyi Zhang, Pandeng Li, Pingyu Wu, Ruihang Chu, Ruili Feng, Shiwei Zhang, Siyang Sun, Tao Fang, Tianxing Wang, Tianyi Gui, Tingyu Weng, Tong Shen, Wei Lin, Wei Wang, Wei Wang, Wenmeng Zhou, Wente Wang, Wenting Shen, Wenyuan Yu, Xianzhong Shi, Xiaoming Huang, Xin Xu, Yan Kou, Yangyu Lv, Yifei Li, Yijing Liu, Yiming Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yi-tong Huang, Yong Li, You Wu, Yu Liu, Yulin Pan, Yun Zheng, Yuntao Hong, Yupeng Shi, Yutong Feng, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Zhi-Fan Wu, and Ziyu Liu. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 , 2025. 2, 5 [29] Yiming Wang, Qihang Zhang, Shengqu Cai, Tong Wu, Jan Ackermann, Zhengfei Kuang, Yang Zheng, Frano Rajiˇ c, Siyu Tang, and Gordon Wetzstein. Bullettime: Decoupled control of time and camera pose for video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.05076 , 2025. 3 [30] Mingyang Wu, Ashirbad Mishra, Soumik Dey, Shuo Xing, Naveen Ravipati, Hansi Wu, Binbin Li, and Zhengzhong Tu. Consid-gen: View-consistent and identity-preserving image-to-video generation, 2026. 2, 3 [31] Tong Wu, Shuai Yang, Ryan Po, Yinghao Xu, Ziwei Liu, Dahua Lin, and Gordon Wetzstein. Video world models with long-term spatial memory. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. 3 [32] Zeqi Xiao, LAN Yushi, Yifan Zhou, Wenqi Ouyang, Shuai Yang, Yanhong Zeng, and Xingang Pan. Worldmem: Long-term consistent world simulation with memory. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. 3, 8 [33] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiao-han Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 2, 5 [34] Yixuan Ye, Xuanyu Lu, Yuxin Jiang, Yuchao Gu, Rui Zhao, Qiwei Liang, Jiachun Pan, Fengda Zhang, Weijia Wu, and Alex Jinpeng Wang. Mind: Benchmarking memory consis-tency and action control in world models, 2026. 2, 3 [35] Jinjing Zhao, Fangyun Wei, Zhening Liu, Hongyang Zhang, Chang Xu, and Yan Lu. Spatia: Video generation with up-datable spatial memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.15716 ,2025. 8 [36] Dian Zheng, Ziqi Huang, Hongbo Liu, Kai Zou, Yinan He, Fan Zhang, Yuanhan Zhang, Jingwen He, Wei-Shi Zheng, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. VBench-2.0: Advancing video generation benchmark suite for intrinsic faithfulness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21755 , 2025. 2, 3 

11 [37] Sixiao Zheng, Minghao Yin, Wenbo Hu, Xiaoyu Li, Ying Shan, and Yanwei Fu. Versecrafter: Dynamic realistic video world model with 4d geometric control. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2026. 3 [38] Zangwei Zheng, Xiangyu Peng, Yuxuan Lou, Chenhui Shen, Tom Young, Xinying Guo, Binluo Wang, Hang Xu, Hongxin Liu, Mingyan Jiang, Wenjun Li, Yuhui Wang, Anbang Ye, Gang Ren, Qianran Ma, Wanying Liang, Xiang Lian, Xi-wen Wu, Yuting Zhong, Zhuangyan Li, Chaoyu Gong, Guo-jun Lei, Leijun Cheng, Limin Zhang, Minghao Li, Ruijie Zhang, Silan Hu, Shijie Huang, Xiaokang Wang, Yuanheng Zhao, Yuqi Wang, Ziang Wei, and Yang You. Open-sora 2.0: Training a commercial-level video generation model in $200k, 2026. 2 [39] Fengzhe Zhou, Jiannan Huang, Jialuo Li, Deva Ramanan, and Humphrey Shi. Pai-bench: A comprehensive benchmark for physical ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.01989 , 2025. 3 [40] Gaoyue Zhou, Hengkai Pan, Yann LeCun, and Lerrel Pinto. Dino-wm: World models on pre-trained visual features en-able zero-shot planning. In Forty-second International Con-ference on Machine Learning , 2025. 3 [41] Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. Stereo magnification: Learning view syn-thesis using multiplane images. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. SIGGRAPH) , 37, 2018. 8 [42] Haoyi Zhu, Yifan Wang, Jianjun Zhou, Wenzheng Chang, Yang Zhou, Zizun Li, Junyi Chen, Chunhua Shen, Jiangmiao Pang, and Tong He. Aether: Geometric-aware unified world modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 8535–8546, 2025. 5 

12 Out of Sight, Out of Mind? Evaluating State Evolution in Video World Models 

# Supplementary Material 

## A. Benchmark 

We present additional tasks of StEvo-Bench in Fig. 8. These example tasks cover all six task categories in StEvo-Bench , each of which captures a fundamentally distinct category of state evolution. The categories span continu-ous evolutions that accumulate gradually over time, sim-ple few-object kinematics, irreversible structural or mate-rial transformations, causal change, and expected behavior of humans or animals. Together, they cover the physical, chemical, and social dimensions of world dynamics, provid-ing a comprehensive probe of a model’s internal simulation capacity. Coupled with our diverse methods of observa-tion control, strong performance on StEvo-Bench reflects genuine, real-world-relevant understanding. 

## B. Verifiers 

B.1. Qualitative Examples 

We provide additional examples of video failures that are caught by each verifier in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. Fig. 9 provides examples of videos that fail to evolve state correctly, either due to failure in state progress, physical implausibility, or incoherence. Fig. 10 shows examples of videos that fail to adhere to specified control, either failing to insert the correct observation control or failing to perform the action that initiates the state evolution. 

B.2. Example Verifier Rationale 

Fig. 11 shows two examples of the verifier rationale. The verifier considers various aspects of the criteria, and pro-vides a short analysis on the violating aspect. 

B.3. Further Verifier-Human Agreement Analysis 

We present further analysis on agreement between the auto-matic verifiers and the human annotators. Mean agreement measured using three metrics and their respective standard deviation are shown in Fig. 12. The standard deviation is low across all criteria and agreement metrics, meaning the behavior of both the verifier and the human annotators are consistent across all comparison pairs. This consis-tency assures that the Verifier-Human (V-H) agreement and Human-Human (H-H) agreement measures are genuine and reliable. We also found strong correlation between V-H agreement and H-H agreement for every criterion across tasks (Fig. 13). The correlation coefficient has 𝑝 < 10 −11 

for all criteria. This means if the automatic verifier disagrees with the human annotators on a video, the video is likely also hard for human annotators to agree on. This confirms that the automatic verifiers agree with human annotators at least as well as human annotators agree with each other. 

B.4. Disagreements 

We analyze videos where the verifiers and human annotators disagree. Example disagreements are shown in Fig. 14. These often coincide with videos where human annotators disagree with each other. Most videos where the verifiers and human annotators disagree exhibit some inherent ambiguity. The ambiguity stems from at least two distinct sources. First, sometimes a quantitative thresholding judgement is required: for exam-ple, how much deflation constitutes a fully deflated mattress? how dark does the room have to be for the “lights off” control to be considered successful? The verifiers and human anno-tators might apply this threshold differently. Second, each party must decide which visual discrepancies are consequen-tial enough to fail a video. A minor physics inconsistency or a subtle continuity glitch may be dismissed as irrelevant noise by one annotator yet treated as a meaningful failure by another. This reflects a subjective salience judgment about what the criterion is ultimately testing. Together, these am-biguity make definitive binary labeling difficult for some videos. When such ambiguity is present, the observed V-H and H-H disagreement should be interpreted as a property of the evaluation task itself rather than a limitation of the verifiers or the human annotators. Occasionally, verifier errors do occur from VLM failures. The VLM may not follow the verifier prompt instructions precisely, or may overlook a subtle but decisive visual detail (Fig. 14). While these reflect occasional, stochastic failures of the underlying VLM, we mitigate them by the ensem-ble design of our verifiers. By querying the VLM multiple times per judgment (with rephrased prompts, when appli-cable) and aggregating votes, we prevent single lapses from contaminating the final judgments in many tasks. 1Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“One end of a black gunpowder 

fuse is lit and sizzling ”

“a heavy curtain drops from the 

ceiling between the camera and 

fuse, completely blocking the view” 

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“A piece of butter sits on an 

active burning stove” 

“a piece of cardboard is held up in 

front of the camera view ,

completely blocking the butter and 

pan” 

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“A tennis ball is just released by 

a robotic arm” 

“a piece of cardboard is held up in 

front of the camera view ,

completely blocking the ball and 

robot arm” 

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“A small metal bullet is 

travelling fast towards a 

suspended wood block” 

“a heavy curtain drops from the 

ceiling between the camera, wood 

block and bullet, completely 

blocking the view” 

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“A honey dipper with a droplet 

of honey is hung over a table” 

“a piece of cardboard is held up in 

front of the camera view ,

completely blocking the ball and 

robot arm” 

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“An empty glass bowl sits 

empty on an outdoor table 

during heavy rainstorm” 

“a heavy curtain drops from the 

ceiling between the camera, wood 

block and bullet, completely 

blocking the view” 

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“An empty wine glass is falling 

off of the edge of a table” 

“The room lights switch off, leaving 

the glass and furniture in complete 

darkness and completely invisible” 

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“The hand keeps pressing the 

trigger of the spray can” 

“a piece of cardboard is held up in 

front of the camera view ,

completely blocking the bowl and 

spray ”

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“While the light is out of view, 

a hand toggles the wall switch” 

“The camera smoothly moves left at 

constant speed until the ceiling 

light exits the frame” 

Camera Control 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“While the sprinkler is out of 

view, a hand turns a valve 

connected to the sprinkler” 

“The camera smoothly moves right 

at constant speed until the 

sprinkler exits the frame” 

Camera Control 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“Athletes in a sprinting race on 

a track in a stadium” 

“a piece of cardboard is held up in 

front of the camera view ,

completely blocking the athletes 

and track from view” 

Occluder 

Initial Frame 

Instruction 

“A white silkworm sitting on a 

leaf is eating the leaf away” 

“a piece of cardboard is held up in 

front of the camera view ,

completely blocking the athletes 

and track from view” 

Occluder Figure 8. Example tasks from StEvo-Bench . Each row shows two tasks from a unique category. Category from top to bottom: continuous evolution, kinematics, relational change, state transformation, causal change, and expected human & animal behavior. 

2Failures Caught By State Progress Verifier 

turn camera right turn camera left 

cardboard occlusion 

ball didn’t drop 

and hit others 

liquid stays 

static despite 

pushing 

# Failures Caught By Physics Plausibility Verifier 

water 

morphed into 

cereal 

block going 

up 

turn camera right turn camera left 

# Failures Caught By Coherence Verifier 

airplane 

incoherent 

direction 

curtain occlusion  

> HY -WorldPlay
> Sora 2 Pro
> HunyuanVideo 1.5
> Genie 3
> WAN 2.2
> Veo 3

shower head 

appearance 

changed 

turn camera down turn camera up Figure 9. Example video generation failures that violate verifiers on the “state evolution” axes. We show separate examples that violate the state progress verifier, physical plausibility verifier, and the coherence verifier. 

3Failures Caught By Observation Control Verifier 

(unsuccessful) curtain occlusion 

curtain did not 

occlude cup 

light off 

light did not 

fully turn off 

# Failures Caught By Action Control Verifier 

Action control prompt: The robot strikes the cue ball with a 

pool cue, sending it to the rack of balls 

Action control prompt: The hand holding scissors cuts the 

string 

(unsuccessful) light off 

cue ball did not 

go to rack of 

balls   

> WAN 2.2
> HunyuanVideo 1.5
> HunyuanVideo 1.5
> Sora 2 Pro

scissor never 

touched the 

string Figure 10. Example video generation failures that violate verifiers on the “control” axes. We show separate examples that violate the observation control verifier and action control verifier. 

4light off 

{

"main_subject ": "showerhead", 

"subject_disappears ": false, 

"subject_reappears ": true, 

"background_cut ": false, 

"state_jump ": false, 

"blackout_reset ": false, 

"teleport": false, 

"coherence": false, 

"notes": "The video starts with a fixed, wall -mounted showerhead. After the camera pans down to 

the water handle and then pans back up, the showerhead reappears as a completely different 

handheld model attached to a hose, which was not present in the initial scene." 

}

## turn camera down turn camera up 

# Video 

# Coherence Verifier Full Output 

# Video 

# Action Control Verifier Full Output 

{

"trigger_applied ": false, 

"notes": "The robot does not strike the cue ball toward the rack; instead, it lifts the pool cue and the 

cue ball moves slightly to the left." 

}Figure 11. Example verifier rationales. The verifier evaluates various aspects defined for each evaluation axis (when applicable), and provides an explanation of how the video violates the corresponding criteria. 

5Figure 12. Mean agreement and standard deviation across three Verifier-Human (V-H) pairs and three Human-Human (H-H) pairs for each criterion. Agreement measured by Accuracy , ROC-AUC and Model Ranking Agreement (MRA) is shown in top, middle and bottom panel respectively. 

6Figure 13. Agreement heatmap for each criterion. V-H agreement and H-H agreement are calculated using Accuracy. With 3 human annotators, both V-H and H-H agreement can only take discrete values from the set {0, 1/3, 2/3, 1}. Correlation between V-H agreement and H-H agreement is calculated using Spearman’s correlation coefficient. 

7Lights off 

# Disagreement: observation control 

Billiards dimly 

visible after 

lights off 

> Veo 3

Curtain drop 

# Disagreement: physical plausibility 

Pins didn’t fall 

after ball hits 

> WAN 2.2

Lights off 

# Disagreement: state progress 

Sand pile un -grew 

after lights off 

> WAN 2.2

Lights off 

# Disagreement: physical plausibility 

Verifier missed: lights 

back on but mattress 

remains dark 

> Veo 3

Lights off 

# Disagreement: coherence 

Verifier confused 

fast stick motion 

for teleportation 

> WAN 2.2

Lights off 

# Disagreement: physical plausibility 

Verifier marked lack 

of state progress as 

physical failure 

> LingBot -world

Figure 14. Example videos where the verifier and human annotators disagree with each other. The top 3 disagreements are caused by ambiguity in the generated videos, and bottom 3 disagreements show verifier failures when they overlooked aspects of the videos or failed to follow the prompts. 

8B.5. Verifier Prompts 

The full prompt of each automatic verifier is provided below. 

Observation Control Verifier Prompt 

You are evaluating a generated video for whether a partial observability mechanism was correctly applied. The following has been determined from the task specification: requested occlusion: {occlusion display }

PARTIAL OBSERVABILITY: The video may hide the scene via in −scene occlusion (lights off, object placed in front, smoke filling the view, etc.) OR by camera pan (camera moves away, taking the subject fully out of frame). Both mechanisms are valid. Do NOT penalise a mismatch between requested occlusion and the mechanism shown in the video. Occlusion success is judged solely by whether the subject became invisible, regardless of how. Evaluate ONE thing from the GENERATED video: occlusion done − Were the key subject and dynamic successfully hidden from view (became invisible) at the appropriate moment, by ANY mechanism? Camera pan that moves the subject fully out of frame counts as occlusion done = True, even if requested occlusion described a different in −scene method − and vice versa. TRUE only if the main subject/area became clearly invisible or fully obscured. FALSE if the dynamic process already completed BEFORE the occlusion took place. FALSE if the scene was never hidden at all. Set to TRUE if requested occlusion is ”none”. General guidance: 

− Use only visual evidence from the video. 

− Ignore timestamps, watermarks, subtitles, and UI overlays. Return ONLY valid JSON in this exact format (no markdown, no commentary): 

{

”occlusion done”: true/false, ”notes”: ”optional short explanation” 

}

Action Control Verifier Prompt 

”You are evaluating a generated video for whether a trigger action was correctly applied. The following has been determined from the task specification: requested trigger: {trigger display }

Evaluate ONE thing from the GENERATED video: trigger applied − Did the requested kickoff action occur? TRUE if the action itself happened or its physical effect is clearly visible. Set to true if requested trigger is ”none”. General guidance: 

− Use only visual evidence from the video. 

− Ignore timestamps, watermarks, subtitles, and UI overlays. Return ONLY valid JSON in this exact format (no markdown, no commentary): 

{

”trigger applied”: true/false, ”notes”: ”optional short explanation” 

}

9State Progress Verifier Prompt 

Your job is to verify whether a video shows an expected physical process. The expected process is: 1. An initial image showing the starting state 2. An action/event that will occur: ” {action prompt }”Based on the initial image and the action described, what physical process or state evolution should happen? Describe the expected changes in the scene, including: 

− What objects or elements will change 

− How they will change (e.g., shape, position, state) 

− What the final state should look like IMPORTANT: This video includes CAMERA MOVEMENT where the camera turns away from the main object. You must specifically check: Did the expected process HAPPEN while the camera was turned away (when the main object was not visible)? This is critical − the process should evolve even when the camera is not looking at it. Watch the video carefully and answer: 1. Did the expected process happen in the video? (Yes/No) 2. Provide a detailed explanation of what is the object state right before it becomes invisible, and right after it is seen again. 3. Compare what happened in the video to what was expected 4. SPECIFICALLY address: Did the process continue/happen during the occlusion or camera movement? 5. If the process did not happen as expected, explain what was different or missing Please ignore physical violations or artifacts. Only focus on whether the key process happened DURING the occlusion or camera movement. After your full explanation, provide a one −sentence summary on the last line in this format: Process: [concise one −sentence description of the expected evolution] Format your response as: VERDICT: [Yes/No] EXPLANATION: [Your detailed explanation] 

10 Prompt 3: Physical Plausibility Verifier Prompt 

You are evaluating a generated video for physical plausibility. An ARTIFACT is any event or behavior in the video that actively violates the laws of physics or is otherwise physically impossible. There are two types: TYPE 1 − Instantaneous violations Something is physically wrong in a single frame or very short moment, independent of what came before or after. Examples: 

− A rigid object (cup, block, bottle) deforms or changes shape without any force being applied 

− An object’s color or texture changes suddenly without a physical cause 

− Two solid objects overlap, pass through each other, or merge together 

− An object abruptly moves or changes velocity with no visible contact, force, or physical cause 

− An object floats in mid −air against gravity, without support or attachment TYPE 2 − Dynamic violations Individual frames look plausible, but the evolution of the scene over time violates physics. The cause is shown, but the WRONG effect follows. Examples: 

− Water is continuously poured into a glass but the level drops or stays flat (the wrong direction of change given the cause). 

− A block slides down a ramp but then reverses upward with no visible push. 

− An object is set in motion but accelerates with no driving force. For TYPE 2, ask yourself: a cause is clearly shown − does the effect that follows actively defy physics? If yes, that is an artifact. If instead the scene simply does not change much (the cause has no visible effect), that is a state evolution failure, not an artifact − do NOT flag it here. INTENDED OCCLUSION CONTEXT: This task intentionally includes the following occlusion: ” {requested occlusion }”. Any scene darkening, blackout, or view obstruction that corresponds to this description is expected behaviour and must NOT be flagged as an artifact. Do NOT flag any irregularities related to the intended occlusion as artifacts. If the intended occlusion does not correctly happen, DO NOT flag it as artifact either. INTENDED STATE EVOLUTION: The following image −edit prompt describes the main physical change that was intended to occur in the scene: ”{init2final edit prompt }”Before judging artifacts, extract a one −sentence plain −language summary of this intended change (e.g. ”the block slides to the bottom of the ramp”) and record it as ” intended state evolution” in your JSON response. CRITICAL DISTINCTION − artifact vs. state evolution failure: 

− ARTIFACT: something WRONG actively happens (a physically impossible event occurs, e.g. an object deforms with no force, two solids pass through each other, water level drops while being poured in). 

− STATE EVOLUTION FAILURE: the intended change simply does NOT happen (e.g. the scene looks frozen, nothing moves, the intended effect is absent). This is evaluated separately and must NOT be flagged here. Only flag as artifact if the video shows an active physical violation, not merely a lack of the intended change. SEVERITY THRESHOLD: Only flag violations that a casual viewer would find clearly jarring and physically impossible. Do NOT flag: 

− Subtle rendering imperfections (slightly uneven textures, minor flickering) 

− Small quantitative discrepancies (smoke that diffuses slightly faster than expected) 

− Sand or granular material appearing or clumping in plausible ways 

− Any effect that, while imperfect, is physically plausible 

− Video quality issues such as blurriness or noise General guidance: 

− Watch the full video before making a judgment. 

− Flag only CLEAR, VISUALLY JARRING violations that a layperson would immediately notice as impossible. 

− Use only visual evidence. Ignore timestamps, watermarks, and UI overlays. Return ONLY valid JSON in this exact format (no markdown, no commentary): 

{

”intended state evolution”: ”one −sentence summary of the intended physical change”, ”artifact”: true/false, ”notes”: ”brief description of what was observed and why it is or is not an artifact” 

}

11 Prompt 4: Coherence Verifier Prompt 

You are evaluating a generated video for temporal and scene coherence. A COHERENCE FAILURE means the video does not appear to be a single, continuous, uninterrupted recording of one scene. INTENDED OCCLUSION: This task uses a CAMERA PAN to hide the subject. The camera sweeps the subject out of frame, then pans back to reveal it. This is intentional and expected behaviour. OCCLUSION vs. DISAPPEARANCE for camera pan: 

− Subject leaving the frame because the camera panned away = OCCLUSION. Mark subject disappears = false in this case. 

− Only mark subject disappears = true if the subject vanishes while still within the camera’s field of view, with no physical cause. Camera pan vs. scene cut: A pan has continuous intermediate frames of spatial motion connecting the two viewpoints. A cut jumps INSTANTANEOUSLY with zero transitional frames. If any sliding motion is visible, it is a pan − not a cut. Do NOT mark background cut = true for a camera pan, even a fast or direction −reversing one. STEP 1 − Identify the main subject. Identify the primary object or entity the video is about. Record it as main subject. STEP 2 − Occlusion vs. disappearance. For this task, determine whether any disappearance of the main subject is explained by the INTENDED OCCLUSION described above. 

− OCCLUSION: subject becomes invisible because something hides it (camera moves away, lights off, curtain drawn, smoke fills frame, etc.). The subject is still physically present − just hidden. NOT a failure. 

− DISAPPEARANCE: subject is simply absent with no physical or occlusion cause. This IS a coherence failure. STEP 3 − Fill in the checklist. Answer each item true or false based only on visual evidence: subject disappears − Did the main subject vanish from the scene with NO physical explanation and NO correspondence to the intended occlusion? (If the intended occlusion accounts for the disappearance, mark false.) subject reappears − After the subject was hidden by occlusion, did it reappear in a state or position that cannot be explained by the visible process? (A normal reveal after intended occlusion is fine − flag only unexpected discontinuous jumps upon reappearance.) background cut − Did the background or environment change INSTANTANEOUSLY (zero transitional frames), implying a hidden edit or scene cut? Example: table surface or wall color abruptly changes; a window switches sides. A camera pan has continuous motion − it is NOT a cut. state jump − Did the main subject’s state change discontinuously, with no visible transition? Example: a full glass is suddenly empty; an intact ice cube is suddenly fully melted, with the melting process entirely skipped. blackout reset − Did the scene briefly black out and then resume in a visibly different configuration (objects repositioned or in different states) with no physical explanation? (A blackout matching the intended occlusion that resumes the same scene is NOT a reset.) teleport − Did any object’s position jump discontinuously between frames, with no continuous motion connecting the two locations? Example: a block on the left of a ramp is suddenly at the bottom right. COHERENCE RULE: coherence = false if ANY checklist item above is true. coherence = true if ALL checklist items are false. Do NOT flag: 

− Normal continuous physical processes, even surprising or fast ones. 

− Video quality issues such as blurriness or noise. 

− subject disappears = false when the subject leaves frame due to camera pan. 

− background cut = false for any camera pan motion, including fast or direction −reversing pans (pan away to hide, pan back to reveal). General guidance: 

− Watch the full video before filling the checklist. 

− Flag only CLEAR failures. Unusual but continuous events are not failures. 

− Use only visual evidence. Ignore timestamps, watermarks, and UI overlays. Return ONLY valid JSON in this exact format (no markdown, no commentary): 

{

”main subject”: ” <primary object or entity in the video >”, ”subject disappears”: true/false, ”subject reappears”: true/false, ”background cut”: true/false, ”state jump”: true/false, ”blackout reset”: true/false, ”teleport”: true/false, ”coherence”: true/false, ”notes”: ”brief explanation referencing specific observations” 

12