Title: AutoUE: Automated Generation of 3D Games in Unreal Engine via Multi-Agent Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07106v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 00:38:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
## AutoUE: Automated Generation of 3D Games in Unreal Engine via Multi-Agent Systems 

Lei Yin 1,* , Wentao Cheng 1,* , Zhida Qin 1,† , Tianyu Huang 1, Yidong Li 2, Gangyi Ding 1

> 1

Beijing Institute of Technology, 2Beijing Jiaotong University 

{3120241020, zanderqin, huangtianyu, dgy}@bit.edu.cn, wentao.cheng23@gmail.com, ydli@bjtu.edu.cn 

> *

Equal contribution, †Corresponding author 

Abstract 

Automatically generating 3D games in com-mercial game engines remains a non-trivial challenge, as it involves complex engine-related workflows for generating assets such as scenes, blueprints, and code. To address this challenge, we propose a novel multi-agent system, AutoUE , which coordinates multiple agents to end-to-end generate 3D games, cover-ing model retrieval, scene generation, gameplay and interaction code synthesis, and automated game testing for evaluation. In order to mitigate tool-use hallucinations in LLMs, we introduce a retrieval-augmented generation mechanism that grounds agents with relevant UE tool docu-mentation. Additionally, we incorporate game design patterns and engine constraints into the code generation process to ensure the genera-tion of correct and robust code. Furthermore, we design an automated play-testing pipeline that generates and executes runtime test com-mands, enabling systematic evaluation of dy-namic behaviors. Finally, we construct a game generation dataset and conduct a series of ex-periments that demonstrate AutoUE’s ability to generate 3D games end-to-end, and validate the effectiveness of these designs. 1

1 Introduction 

Digital games, as one of the most influential forms of interactive media, play an essential role in enter-tainment and simulation (Martins de Freitas Cintra et al., 2025; Park et al., 2023). Due to the need to design complex visual environments and system logic, the game creation remains a highly creative yet labor-intensive process. Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Guo et al., 2025) and generative mod-els (Ho et al., 2020) have motivated studies on automated game generation from natural language descriptions (Che et al., 2025; Valevski et al., 2025; 

> 1

The code is released at https://github.com/ Pluto156/AutoUE .Scene           

> Environment, Object,
> Character, Light
> Examples
> •Snowy campsite,
> •Tent at the center,
> •Campfire in front of tent,
> •Supply bag beside tent,
> •Player character,
> •Daytime
> Target, Player ability,
> Interaction logic
> Examples
> •Secure the campsite,
> •Move around campsite,
> •Interact with campfire,
> •Inspect supply bag
> Gameplay

Figure 1: An example of game scene and gameplay. 

Dai et al., 2024), aiming to reduce development bar-riers. A promising direction is to integrate LLMs with game engines to generate in-engine assets (Maleki and Zhao, 2024; Buongiorno et al., 2024), which offers better controllability, editability, and practical value for game development. Despite these advances, automatically generat-ing 3D games in game engines remains a non-trivial challenge (Earle et al., 2025). Compared with 2D or simple game settings (Todd et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Sudhakaran et al., 2023), 3D games require more complex spatial layouts, gameplay behaviors, and coordination across multiple sub-systems. Recent works have integrated LLMs with commercial engines such as Unreal Engine (UE) and Unity to generate 3D scenes (SongTang et al., 2025), gameplay logic (Wayama et al., 2022), and engine code (Yang et al., 2025). However, most of these efforts focus on isolated individual com-ponents, making it difficult to generate a complete, playable 3D game end-to-end. To address these challenges, we propose 

AutoUE , a novel multi-agent system that coordi-nates agents for model retrieval, scene generation, gameplay code, interactive object, and automated play-testing to produce complete 3D games in UE. Specifically, the model retrieval agent builds an embedding database over 858K 3D models, en-abling efficient semantic retrieval of relevant model assets. Based on the retrieved models, the scene 

> arXiv:2603.07106v1 [cs.HC] 7 Mar 2026

generation agent uses UE’s built-in tool Procedu-ral Content Generation (PCG) to generate a visu-ally editable layout graph that produces a coher-ent 3D scene. Then, the gameplay code agent fol-lows common game-development design patterns and respects engine-specific constraints to generate modular gameplay C++ code. Building on these modules, the interactive object agent derives ob-ject interaction flows and implements the corre-sponding C++ code, enabling in-scene entities to provide player interactions consistent with the de-scription. Finally, the automated play-testing agent automatically generates and executes runtime test commands to evaluate the scene and gameplay be-haviors. These agents communicate via structured specifications to convey contextual information and ensure consistency across the system. Our system has the following innovations: (1) Compared to other engines, UE provides comprehensive built-in tools for efficient game de-velopment. To mitigate tool-use hallucinations by LLMs, we propose a retrieval-augmented genera-tion (RAG) based mechanism that retrieves relevant information from tool documents and provides the agent with accurate usage instructions. (2) Existing methods often overlook design pat-terns in game development, resulting in uncon-strained code that is difficult to maintain and extend. To address this limitation, we generate functional gameplay module code and design a module man-agement framework based on common practices. This enables the system to produce reusable and composable gameplay code, which can be invoked by interactive objects in a controlled manner. (3) Prior work evaluates generated assets via hu-man inspection or static checks. However, a com-plete game is defined by dynamic gameplay and interaction behaviors, making objective evaluation without human effort challenging. We introduce an automated play-testing pipeline that generates test commands and implements a Model Context Pro-tocol (MCP) to execute them at runtime, enabling automated and systematic evaluation. Finally, we construct a dataset of 20 game-generation tasks and demonstrate that our method produces higher-quality 3D scenes than existing ap-proaches. Meanwhile, we design multiple metrics that evaluate dynamic gameplay behaviors based on the generated gameplay and interaction code as well as runtime logs, providing a benchmark for end-to-end 3D game generation in game engines. Overall, our contributions are summarized as: • We present a practical end-to-end multi-agent system for generating 3D games in UE. The system collaboratively constructs a coherent 3D scene, synthesizes robust gameplay and interac-tion code, and performs automated play-testing. • We design a RAG mechanism that provides agents with tool-usage guidance, thereby reduc-ing hallucinations for LLMs. During code gener-ation, we incorporate game design patterns and engine constraints to improve the maintainability and extensibility of the generated code. • We construct a game-generation dataset and es-tablish an automated play-testing pipeline, pro-viding a benchmark for 3D game generation. It offers a solid foundation for multi-agent game generation, and the overall system provides an extensible infrastructure for future work. 

2 Related Work 

Existing research on applying agents to games can be divided into two types: 

2.1 LLMs as Game Playing Agents 

One line of work treats LLMs as game playing agents and uses games as testbeds to improve the agents’s ability to process complex observa-tions. Early studies primarily focus on text-based games: Hausknecht et al. (2020) proposes an eval-uation framework for interactive fiction and adopts a template-based action space to reduce complex-ity. Recent studies have further applied LLMs to open-world 3D games. DEPS (Wang et al., 2023) conditions planning on environment feedback and sub-goal selection to robustly complete diverse Minecraft tasks. Voyager (Wang et al., 2024) com-bines an expanding skill library with a feedback-driven iterative loop to achieve open-ended explo-ration in Minecraft. In addition, recent work has also explored agents in a wide range of game gen-res, including competitive (Wang et al., 2025) and action (Chen et al., 2024) games. The latest ad-vances (Tan et al., 2025) train foundation models on large-scale gameplay data, enabling generaliza-tion to unseen games. 

2.2 LLMs as Game Generation Agents 

Another line of work uses LLMs to generate game content, including text/video-based and engine-integrated game generation. The former gener-ates game experiences in the form of text narra-tives (Côté et al., 2018), scripted interactions (Sun et al., 2023), or video-like content (Bruce et al., The game takes place at 

> a small checkpoint at the
> entrance of a forest.
> A wooden gate blocks
> the path forward.
> The player’s objective is
> to enter the forest…

Game Description 𝒙    

> Scene Desc 𝑫𝒆𝒔𝒄 𝑺
> A small checkpoint
> located at the
> entrance of a forest,
> featuring a wooden
> gate blocking the
> path forward, a
> signpost placed
> nearby displaying
> information, and a
> GuardNPC standing
> beside the gate… 𝓓𝒆𝒄𝒐𝒎𝒑𝒐𝒔𝐞
> The player can move
> around the checkpoint
> area, interact with the
> signpost to read area
> information, and open
> the wooden gate to
> proceed into the
> forest…
> Gameplay Desc 𝑫𝒆𝒔𝒄 𝑮

Model Retrieval Agent 

> Category
> Name
> Desc
> Placement
> Guidance
> 𝓖𝒆𝒏𝒆𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒆 𝑶𝒃𝒋

Generate 

Scene 

Objects 

List of Object Attributes 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭[𝑨𝒕𝒕𝒓𝒔 𝑶𝒃𝒋 ]

> 858K Model
> Embedding
> Database

Pre-Filtering 

Text 

Encoder 

𝐞 ஽௘௦௖ ಾభ

𝐞 ஽௘௦௖ ಾ೘

…

𝐞 ஽௘௦௖ ೚್ೕ 

Top-k Sim 

Models’ 

Desc and 

Score 

𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭 𝑴 

Re-Rank 

Top-1 Model as Object Asset 

> Cosine
> Similarity

PCG Graph Planning 

Sample 

GetLand 

Transform 

Select 

Random 

Bounds 

Pruning 

Difference 

Collapse Spawn 

Node Chains 

𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭 𝑵𝒐𝒅𝒆 (𝒙,𝒚)     

> 𝓟𝒍𝒂𝒏 𝑵𝒐𝒅𝒆
> Small Objects Pattern
> Large Objects
> Pattern
> Extend Node
> List of 𝑵𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝒙,𝒚
> Params and Conns
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭 𝑨𝒕𝒕𝒓𝒔 𝑵𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝒙,𝒚
> 𝓖𝒆𝒏𝒆𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒆 𝑵𝒐𝒅𝒆

𝐞 ஼భ

…

𝐞 ஼೙

> Document Corpus

𝐞 ே௢ௗ௘ 

Top-c Sim 

Chunks 

𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭 𝑪 

RAG 

RAG-based Node Specification 

MCP 

Scene Generation Agent              

> 𝑫𝒆𝒔𝒄 𝑮 𝓟𝒍𝒂𝒏 𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆
> 𝓢𝒐𝒓𝒕 𝑴
> Topological Sort
> •Design purpose,
> •Dependent modules,
> •Code templates,
> •Engine constraints
> Dependencies
> Management
> Framework
> UE C++
> Implement
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭[𝑨𝒕𝒕𝒓𝒔 𝑴 ]
> Module
> Attributes
> 𝓟𝒍𝒂𝒏 𝑰𝒏𝒕
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭[𝑨𝒕𝒕𝒓𝒔 𝑶𝒃𝒋 ]
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭[𝑨𝒕𝒕𝒓𝒔 𝑰𝒏𝒕 ]
> Interaction Attributes
> 𝓖𝒆𝒏𝒆𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒆 𝑰𝒏𝒕 •Interaction description,
> •Module dependencies,
> •Interaction flow,
> •External systems
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭[𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝑴 ]𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝑰𝒏𝒕
> Interactive Object C++
> 𝓖𝒆𝒏𝒆𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒆 𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆
> 𝒇𝒐𝒓 𝑴 𝒊
> 𝒇𝒐𝒓 𝑴 𝒊
> 𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝑴 𝒊
> 𝑫𝒆𝒑𝒔 𝑴 𝒊

Gameplay Code Agent 

Interactive Object Agent        

> 𝑫𝒆𝒔𝒄 𝑺
> 𝑫𝒆𝒔𝒄 𝑮
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭[𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝑴 ]
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭 [𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝑰𝒏𝒕 ]
> 𝓖𝒆𝒏𝒆𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒆 𝑻𝒆𝒔𝒕 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭[𝑪𝒎𝒅 ]
> UE Runtime Environment
> Open
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭 [𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝑴 ]
> 𝐋𝐢𝐬𝐭 [𝑪𝒐𝒅𝒆 𝑰𝒏𝒕 ]
> Evaluation of
> Game G

Automated Play-testing Agent 

> Perform
> Cmd

MCP Figure 2: The overall framework of our proposed multi-agent system AutoUE. Blue arrows indicate the workflow. 

2024). Such games are easier to synthesize end-to-end, but they lack free-form spatial interactions and developer-editable content. Therefore, recent studies couple LLMs with game engines to gener-ate in-engine assets for modern game development. Sketch2Scene (Xu et al., 2024) uses diffusion mod-els to turn user sketches into isometric 2D scene guides, and feeds guides into procedural genera-tion to build 3D game scenes. 3Dify (Hayashi et al., 2025) uses RAG and MCP to invoke tools like Blender, Unity, and UE to create 3D scenes with iterative user feedback. UnrealLLM (Song-Tang et al., 2025) achieves automated high-quality 3D scene generation in UE by leveraging multi-modal asset retrieval and PCG powered by expert knowledge. Hassan (2025) parse game design doc-uments and fine-tune LLMs to generate modular, compilable, and design-consistent Unity C# game template prototypes. UniGen (Yang et al., 2025) builds a multi-agent framework to generate Unity C# code, attach the code to components, and sup-port iterative debugging. These studies focus on a single stage of the pipeline in isolation. Due to the tightly coupled nature of game engine workflows, these components are often not trivially compos-able. DreamGarden (Earle et al., 2025) takes a step toward end-to-end generation by using hierarchical planning and iteratively construct a game prototype in UE. Nevertheless, its generated results remain limited in overall quality and lack robustness when facing complex requirements, highlighting the need for a more reliable, workflow-aligned system for complete 3D game generation in game engines. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 System Overview 

Figure 2 illustrates our multi-agent system, which consists of five LLMs agents: (1) Model Retrieval Agent, (2) Scene Generation Agent, (3) Gameplay Code Agent, (4) Interactive Object Agent, and (5) Automated Play-testing Agent. We adopt the model context protocol as a stan-dardized interface between our agents and UE. When an agent produces structured specifications that need to be integrated into UE, it invokes the engine tools or code exposed via our MCP imple-mentation to import the outputs into the project and execute the corresponding application work-flow. As MCP primarily serves as an engineering integration layer, we do not further elaborate on its implementation details in the following sections. 

3.2 Problem Formulation 

Given a game description x, our goal is to construct a complete UE game G that consists of a coherent 3D scene, executable gameplay code, interactive object logic, and automated testing instructions. Since x often interleaves scene content with gameplay intent, it blurs the line between what should be built and what should happen, poten-tially confusing downstream agents. Therefore, we first decompose x into a scene description Desc Sand a gameplay description Desc G:

Desc S , Desc G = Decompose (x), (1) where Desc S defines the scene context and key ob-jects, while Desc G defines the gameplay mechan-ics and player interactions; and Decompose de-notes the prompt used to query LLMs. The prompt details are provided in Appendix Figure 7. 

3.3 Model Retrieval Agent 

As the fundamental entities in the game world, scene objects are not only crucial for the visual presentation, but also provide the essential basis for interaction modeling. Based on Desc S , we construct a list of key scene object along with their associated attributes, represented as: List [Attrs Obj ] = Generate Obj (Desc S ), (2) where the object attributes Attrs Obj contain name, category, description, and spatial placement guid-ance; and the prompt details of Generate Obj are provided in Appendix Figure 8. The Attrs Obj are then used in our retrieval pipeline, which is built on TexVerse (Zhang et al., 2025), a repository with over 858K text-described 3D models from Sketchfab. To efficiently retrieve relevant models, we use a text encoder to create an embedding database from the model descriptions. Due to the large number of models, we first ap-ply a pre-filtering process using Sketchfab’s 18 categories to narrow down the search according to the category in Attrs Obj . Next, we calculate the cosine similarity between the encoded object de-scription in Attrs Obj and the embedding of filtered models to retrieve the top-k models, formulated as: List [M ] = Sort      

> h
> Sim (eDesc Obj ,eDesc Mi)
> imi=1
> 
> [: k],

(3) where List [M ] is the list of model description and similarity score of the top-k retrieved models, Sort 

denotes the function that sorts values in descending order, Sim denotes the cosine similarity function, 

eDesc Obj and eDesc Mi are the embeddings of the object description and the i-th model description, and m is the number of models after pre-filtering. Then, we use LLMs to re-rank List [M ] based on 

Attrs Obj . The top-1 model after reranking is used as the retrieved 3D model for the object. 

3.4 Scene Generation Agent 

After retrieving high-quality 3D object models, we stably build a coherent UE scene based on these as-sets. Instead of generating hard-coded coordinates, we leverage PCG to synthesize the scene layout. PCG represents scene construction as a visually configurable graph, connecting modular nodes that support functions such as surface sampling, point transformation, and bounds modification. These nodes make PCG a natural fit for Desc S , as they fulfill most of the abstract placement intentions and can be extended to meet additional needs. 

3.4.1 PCG graph planning 

Based on Desc S and List [Attrs Obj ], we generate one PCG node chain per scene object. Each chain is described by an ordered list of node types with explicit editor coordinates, denoted as: List [N ode (x,y )] = Plan N ode (Desc S , Attrs Obj ), (4) where List [N ode (x, y )] denotes a PCG node chain, whose each element is a node of type N ode located at editor coordinates (x, y ), and the prompt details of Plan N ode are provided in Appendix Figure 9. In practice, unconstrained PCG graph genera-tion leads to unstable or hard-to-debug procedu-ral behaviors. Therefore, we classify the object placement into two canonical PCG patterns, each capturing a frequent production need: • Large objects (e.g., buildings) require stable sam-pling and spacing. The chain ends with a direct spawn step after pruning and bounds control to avoid overlaps and out-of-bound placements. • Small scatter objects (e.g., trees, rocks) must avoid intersecting major actors. We add exclu-sion nodes to subtract forbidden regions, improv-ing collision avoidance and visual coherence. This design enables production-level stability, pro-vides flexibility through parameters (e.g., density, bounds), and can meet a broader range of require-ments through extended modes. 

3.4.2 RAG-based node specification 

The planned list only specifies which nodes ap-pear, but it lacks the parameters and pin connec-tions. To avoid hallucinating these details, we adopt RAG over the full document corpus: we segment all available documents into a unified set of text chunks and retrieve the most relevant chunks for each target node. In practice, source material may include cross-references across documents and sec-tions. A strictly indexing scheme is expensive to maintain, scales poorly with new nodes, and may lead to excessive context during generation. There-fore, we use semantic retrieval to fetch the minimal guidance needed for each node, represented as: List (C) = Sort  [Sim (eN ode , eCi )] ni=1 

 [: c], (5)     

> Attrs N ode =Generate N ode (N ode (x,y ),List (C)) ,

(6) where n is the number of chunks, Ci is the i-th chunk, eN ode and eCi are the embeddings of N ode (x,y ) and Ci, List (C) is the retrieved top-c chunks, Attrs N ode are the parameters and connections for N ode (x,y ), and the details of 

Generate N ode are provided in Appendix Fig 10. The RAG knowledge enables PCG to generate re-liable scenes, while also making it easy to introduce new node capabilities by adding document. Finally, we develop MCP tools to convert all Attrs N ode 

into the UE PCG editor. This approach can also be extended to other game development tools, as they typically modular in design and provide the necessary usage information in documents. 

3.5 Gameplay Code Agent 

To realize executable gameplay logic, we follow a planned generation pipeline, where the system first analyzes Desc G to plan the required functional logic modules, and then generates the correspond-ing UE C++ implementations, formulated as: List [Attrs M ] = Plan Code (Desc G), (7)           

> for Mi∈ S ort M(List [Attrs M]) : Code Mi=
> Generate Code (Desc G,List [Attrs M], Deps Mi),(8)

where List [Attrs M ] is the planned list of module attributes, Mi is the i-th module, Sort M performs a topological sort based on the dependencies be-tween modules, Code Mi is the C++ implementa-tion code of Mi, Deps Mi are the generated code of modules that Mi depends on, and the details of Plan Code and Generate Code are provided in Appendix Figure 11 and Figure 12, respectively. Specifically, Attrs M contains the design pur-pose, usage, and dependent modules to provide more context for code generation. We also provide code templates and engine-related constraints (e.g., export/registration macros, include whitelist, log-ging, and cross-module access) in Generate Code 

to improve code generation stability. Additionally, following common game development practices, we design a generic module management frame-work as MCP for the module code. Together, these designs ensure that gameplay logic can be reliably triggered by in-engine interactions while remaining extensible and consistent with UE. 

3.6 Interactive Object Agent 

The generated modules (e.g., InventoryModule, Di-alogueModule) are invoked within the object inter-action implementation methods to execute concrete gameplay logic (e.g., pickup, dialogue). To imple-ment the interaction, we first infer which modules should be invoked and the specific order in which their methods should be called, represented as: List [Attrs Int ] = Plan Int (List [Attrs Obj ], List [Code M ]) , (9) where Attrs Int denotes the attributes of the interac-tive object, including interaction description, mod-ule dependencies, interaction flow, and whether external systems such as combat or navigation plu-gins need to be invoked; and the prompt details of 

Plan Int are provided in Appendix Figure 13. Based on these inferred attributes, we generate the C++ code for each interactive object:      

> Code Int =Generate Int (Attrs Int ,List [Code M]) ,

(10) where Code Int denotes the generated C++ code for the interactive object, and Generate Int ensures consistent interaction logic through the module’s context and the interaction flow. The prompt details of Generate Int are provided in Appendix Fig 14. 

3.7 Automated Play-testing Agent 

After generating the interaction code, we have com-pleted the entire UE game construction. However, there are multiple ways to implement Desc S and 

Desc G, and evaluating the generated content be-comes a challenge. To address this, we set up an evaluation environment by generating and execut-ing test instructions, denoted as: List [Cmd ] = Generate T est (Desc S ,Desc G, List [Code M ], List [Code Int ]) , (11) where List [Cmd ] is the testing commands used to evaluate our game G, and the prompt details of 

Generate T est are provided in Appenidx Figure 15. There are two types of testing commands: mov-ing to an object and performing specific interac-tions. We automatically execute these commands in UE runtime environment through MCP. The run-time screenshots, execution logs, List [N ode (x,y )],List [Code M ], List [Code Int ], and middle specifica-tions are used for the final evaluation of our gener-ated game G, providing a thorough evaluation. Figure 3: Visual comparison with SceneX. The first column shows scenes from SceneX; the second column shows the corresponding scenes in AutoUE; the third and fourth columns present AutoUE’s interactions within each scene. 

4 Experiments 

We evaluate our multi-agent game generation sys-tem AutoUE from five perspectives, corresponding to the key claims made in previous sections: • Q1 : Can AutoUE generate complete, playable UE games end-to-end, and what is the overall quality of the generated games? • Q2 : Compared with existing scene generation baselines, are the scenes generated by AutoUE better in terms of aesthetic quality? • Q3 : What is the impact of RAG-based node spec-ification on generating valid PCG graphs. • Q4 : What is the impact of game design patterns on the quality of the generated gameplay code? 

4.1 Experimental Setup 4.1.1 Dataset 

We construct a benchmark of 20 game generation tasks (denoted as PlayGen-20). These tasks cover common interactions in game design (e.g., pickup, open, dialogue, inspect, and combat). Task details are provided in the Appendix Figure 4, 5, and 6. To better evaluate AutoUE under different lev-els of game design complexity, we further divide PlayGen-20 into three difficulty categories based on scene complexity and interaction complexity: • Easy (5 games). These tasks focus on onboard-ing and practicing basic interactions. The designs include a single or low-complexity interaction, clear feedback with low failure cost. This cat-egory is well-suited for evaluating end-to-end playability and basic interaction correctness. • Medium (7 games). These tasks focus on more                     

> Score Scene Gameplay Visual Game Easy 10.0 8.30 7.70 8.72
> Medium 9.79 8.29 8.14 8.74
> Hard 9.94 8.19 7.50 8.59
> All 9.90 8.25 7.78 8.68
> Table 1: The game evaluation results on PlayGen-20.

exploration and collection. The designs include multiple interactive objects, and a slower pace that encourages players to interact more broadly with the environment. This category is well-suited for evaluating the ability to organize di-verse interactive objects, enrich scene content, and achieve broader interaction coverage. • Hard (8 games). These tasks introduce explicit progression constraints and stronger interaction dependencies. The designs feature clearer state transitions and tighter coupling between scene objects and gameplay logic. This category is well-suited for evaluating robustness under com-plex interaction flows, including dependency cor-rectness and the reliability of generated code. 

4.1.2 Settings 

All experiments are conducted in Unreal Engine 5, which is one of the most advanced and broadly adopted game engines. For LLMs, we use Qwen-Plus as the default backbone for generation and evaluation. In Q2, we instead use GPT-4o only for evaluation to align with baslines. 

4.2 Overall Game Evaluation (Q1) 

To objectively evaluate the overall quality of UE games generated end-to-end by AutoUE, we adopt an LLMs-as-a-judge evaluation method and care-fully design the evaluation prompt (the prompt de-Approach GAS Generative Baselines         

> DreamFusion (ICLR 23) (Poole et al., 2023) 4.83 Magic3D (CVPR 23) (Lin et al., 2023) 6.39 WonderJ (CVPR 24) (Yu et al., 2024) 7.38
> Procedural Baselines
> Infinigen (CVPR 23) (Raistrick et al., 2023) 6.61 3D-GPT (3DV 25) (Sun et al., 2025) 6.76 SceneX (AAAI 25) (Zhou et al., 2025) 7.31 UnrealLLM (ACL 25) (SongTang et al., 2025) 7.71
> AutoUE 7.8

Table 2: The scene generation evaluation results. 

tails are provided in Appendix Figure 16). The LLMs score each game along three dimen-sions, each on a 1–10 scale: (1) Scene : evalu-ates the correctness of PCG based on build logs and PCG node chains, (2) Gameplay : evaluates whether gameplay and interactive logic work as intended, based on gameplay/interaction attributes and code, (3) Visual : evaluates the visually coher-ence of game with the description, based on scene and interaction screenshots. The three dimension scores are aggregated into a final Game score using weights of 0.35, 0.35, and 0.3, respectively. Notably, Scene and Gameplay place strong em-phasis on successful build as these two dimensions are used to assess whether AutoUE can generate complete, playable games end-to-end. In contrast, 

Visual is used to evaluate the quality of games. As shown shown in Table 1, AutoUE achieves strong performance, indicating that the system can stably generate playable UE games end-to-end. On the Scene dimension, Hard games score higher than Medium games because Hard tasks involve more complex PCG graphs, and success-fully building these graphs yields higher scores. This also indicates that AutoUE can reliably han-dle more complex scene generation requirements. On the Visual dimension, Easy games lower than Medium games due to content constrains limit vi-sual richness. Hard games receive the lowest scores primarily because deviations in interactions from the intended behavior degrade visual quality. This demonstrates that the Visual metric is sensitive to the quality of the generated games. Overall, the Game and Gameplay scores follow the expected difficulty trend, suggesting that the primary challenge at higher difficulty stems from the complexity of gameplay and interaction logic. 

4.3 Scene Generation Evaluation (Q2) 

To further evaluate the quality of scenes generated by AutoUE, we follow the evaluation setup of Un-                                                                 

> Variant Category SNode SParam SPin SPCG
> W/o patterns Easy 71.7 99.6 51.4 4.02 W/o params 100 47.9 100 3.96 W/o conns 100 100 82.1 5.34 AutoUE 100 100 100 8.38
> W/o patterns Medium 82.5 100 70.7 4.71 W/o params 100 53.1 99.7 4.49 W/o conns 100 100 79.4 5.09 AutoUE 100 100 100 8.46
> W/o patterns Hard 82 99.1 65.9 5.29 W/o params 100 61.5 100 5.18 W/o conns 100 100 80.2 4.75 AutoUE 100 100 100 8.40
> W/o patterns All 79.6 99.6 64.0 4.77 W/o params 100 55.2 99.9 4.63 W/o conns 100 100 80.4 5.02 AutoUE 100 100 100 8.42

Table 3: PCG graph evaluation results. 

realLLM (SongTang et al., 2025). Specifically, Un-realLLM uses the GPT Aesthetic Score (GAS) to quantify aesthetic quality by assessing factors such as composition, color harmony, lighting, material and texture fidelity, richness of details, overall co-herence, and artistic impact. As shown in Table 2, AutoUE achieves the best GAS of 7.8, outperforming both generative and procedural baselines, which indicates that AutoUE produces scenes with higher-quality aesthetics. Compared with generative baselines, procedural methods exhibit more stable scores, suggesting that procedural tools provide stronger structural priors and controllability, thereby enabling more consis-tent generation of high-quality scenes. However, Infinigen, 3D-GPT, and SceneX synthesize scenes in modeling environments such as Blender, rather than fully leveraging the PCG tool chain within game engines. In contrast, UnrealLLM grounds procedural generation directly in UE PCG graphs and achieves a high GAS of 7.71, which highlights the advantage of engine-native PCG pipelines in organizing scene layout. Although AutoUE shows only a limited improve-ment over UnrealLLM, it is worth noting that GAS is a subjective metric and exhibits a pronounced saturation effect. In our empirical evaluation, we find it very difficult to obtain ratings above 8, which means that scores close to 8 typically indicate that the artistic quality has reached a high level. Further-more, as illustrated in Figure 3, AutoUE produces scenes with richer object composition and more ac-tionable interactive affordances than SceneX, lead-ing to more coherent gameplay-oriented layouts. 

4.4 PCG Graph Evaluation (Q3) 

To verify the effectiveness of our defined PCG pat-terns and the RAG-based node specification, we conduct an ablation study on PlayGen-20. Specifi-cally, we design three variants and four metrics: • W/o patterns removes two pre-defined PCG node chains (Large objects and Small scatter ob-jects) and freely constructs the PCG graph. • W/o params removes all parameter content of PCG nodes from the PCG document corpus. • W/o conns removes all pin connection content of PCG nodes from the PCG document corpus. • S Node : the node creation success rate, whether the nodes are defined PCG nodes. • S Param : the node’s parameter filling success rate. • S Pin : the node’s pin connection success rate. • S PCG : the LLMs-judged score that measures the quality of the PCG graph. It ranges from 1 to 10 and the prompt is provided in Appendix Fig 17). As shown in Table 3, AutoUE achieves 100% success rates for node creation, parameter filling, pin connection across all difficulties, and obtains the highest SPCG of 8.42, indicating robust and high-quality PCG graph generation. Meanwhile, each variant causes a clear degradation in its cor-responding metric. W/o patterns substantially re-duces SNode and SPin to 79.6% and 64.0%, sug-gesting that the pre-defined patterns provide cru-cial structural priors for constructing PCG graphs. 

W/o params keeps the graph structure usable, but SParam drops sharply to 55.2%, accompanied by a significant decrease in SPCG , demonstrating that retrieved parameter semantics are essential for cor-rect procedural generation behavior. W/o conns 

mainly affects wiring correctness: SPin decreases to 80.4%, and SPCG drops to 5.02, confirming that RAG-provided pin-connection knowledge im-proves the reliability of PCG graph connections. Collectively, these experimental results demon-strate the importance of our defined PCG patterns and the RAG-based node specification for reliably constructing PCG graphs in UE. 

4.5 Gameplay Code Evaluation (Q4) 

To verify the effectiveness of the game develop-ment designs in gameplay code generation, we also design three variants and four evaluation metrics: • W/o dependencies removes module-dependency knowledge in Plan Code and Generate Code .• W/o code templates removes the code templates in the prompt of Generate Code .• W/o engine constraints removes the engine con-straints in the prompt of Generate Code .                                                                 

> Variant Category MAS MCS IIS GCS
> W/o dependencies Easy 8.20 002.46 W/o code templates 8.00 002.40 W/o engine constraints 8.00 002.40 AutoUE 8.00 7.50 6.70 7.33
> W/o dependencies Medium 8.21 002.46 W/o code templates 8.36 002.51 W/o engine constraints 8.14 002.44 AutoUE 8.07 7.57 6.79 7.41
> W/o dependencies Hard 8.38 002.51 W/o code templates 8.19 002.46 W/o engine constraints 8.13 002.44 AutoUE 8.06 7.56 6.73 7.38
> W/o dependencies All 8.28 002.48 W/o code templates 8.20 002.46 W/o engine constraints 8.10 002.44 AutoUE 8.05 7.55 6.74 7.38

Table 4: The gameplay code evaluation results. 

• MAS (Module Analysis Score): evaluates the quality of the planned module attributes list. • MCS (Module Code Score): evaluates the quality of the generated gameplay module code. • IIS (Interactive Integration Score): evaluates how effectively interactions integrate with the module. • GCS (Gameplay Code Score): evaluates the over-all gameplay code generation quality, computed as 0.3 × MAS + 0 .3 × MCS + 0 .4 × IIS .These metrics are evaluated by LLMs judges using the prompt in Appendix Figure 18). MAS ,

MCS , and IIS range from 1–10 when compilation succeeds; otherwise MCS and IIS are set to 0. As shown in Table 4, all three variants consis-tently fail to compile, which leads to a significant drop in GCS . This indicates that removing mod-ule dependencies, code templates, or engine con-straints severely undermines the ability to generate compilable UE gameplay code. Overall, these re-sults verify that our game development designs in gameplay code generation are essential for end-to-end compilable gameplay code generation. 

5 Conclusion 

In this work, we present a novel multi-agent sys-tem, AutoUE, for the automated generation of com-plete 3D games in UE. By leveraging RAG, game design patterns, and engine-specific constraints, AutoUE effectively coordinates agents to generate coherent scenes, robust gameplay code, and inter-active objects, while ensuring the dynamic evalua-tion of gameplay through automated play-testing. Our experimental results demonstrate that AutoUE produces high-quality 3D games. This work also provides an extensible infrastructure for future ad-vancements in automated game development. Ethical Analysis 

There are no ethical concerns associated with this work. AutoUE is a tool designed to automate 3D game generation in UE, with the aim of helping de-velopers accelerate the game development process. The dataset used for model retrieval contains only publicly available 3D models, and the game gen-eration tasks are based on predefined descriptions, without involving any sensitive or personal data. 

Limitations 

One limitation of our work is the inability to com-pare AutoUE with DreamGarden (Earle et al., 2025), an advanced 3D game generation system based on UE, as it has not been open-sourced. Addi-tionally, although our system performs well across various tasks, the scope of our evaluation dataset may not fully encompass the complexity of real-world game development scenarios. Therefore, fur-ther evaluation on a broader set of tasks and more challenging game scenarios would help assess the scalability and robustness of AutoUE. 

References 

Jake Bruce, Michael D Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes, Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, and 1 others. 2024. Genie: Generative in-teractive environments. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Steph Buongiorno, Lawrence Klinkert, Zixin Zhuang, Tanishq Chawla, and Corey Clark. 2024. Pangea: procedural artificial narrative using generative ai for turn-based, role-playing video games. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment , volume 20, pages 156–166. Haoxuan Che, Xuanhua He, Quande Liu, Cheng Jin, and Hao Chen. 2025. Gamegen-x: Interactive open-world game video generation. In The Thirteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations .Peng Chen, Pi Bu, Jun Song, Yuan Gao, and Bo Zheng. 2024. Can vlms play action role-playing games? take black myth wukong as a study case. In NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Open-World Agents .Marc-Alexandre Côté, Akos Kádár, Xingdi Yuan, Ben Kybartas, Tavian Barnes, Emery Fine, James Moore, Matthew Hausknecht, Layla El Asri, Mahmoud Adada, and 1 others. 2018. Textworld: A learning environment for text-based games. In Workshop on Computer Games , pages 41–75. Springer. Shiqi Dai, Xuanyu Zhu, Naiqi Li, Tao Dai, and Zhi Wang. 2024. Procedural level generation with diffu-sion models from a single example. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 38, pages 10021–10029. Sam Earle, Samyak Parajuli, and Andrzej Banburski-Fahey. 2025. Dreamgarden: A designer assistant for growing games from a single prompt. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–19. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforce-ment learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638. Amna Hassan. 2025. Automated unity game template generation from gdds via nlp and multi-modal llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08847 .Matthew Hausknecht, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Xingdi Yuan. 2020. Interactive fiction games: A colossal adventure. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 34, pages 7903–7910. Shun-ichiro Hayashi, Daichi Mukunoki, Tetsuya Hoshino, Satoshi Ohshima, and Takahiro Katagiri. 2025. 3dify: a framework for procedural 3d-cg gen-eration assisted by llms using mcp and rag. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04536 .Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. De-noising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840– 6851. Chengpeng Hu, Yunlong Zhao, and Jialin Liu. 2024. Game generation via large language models. In 2024 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG) , pages 1–4. IEEE. Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. 2023. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content creation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition , pages 300–309. Mahdi Farrokhi Maleki and Richard Zhao. 2024. Pro-cedural content generation in games: A survey with insights on emerging llm integration. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment , volume 20, pages 167–178. Luiza Martins de Freitas Cintra, Elisa Ayumi Masasi de Oliveira, Rafael Teixeira Sousa, Valdemar Vicente Graciano, Arlindo Galvão, Gustavo Webster, and Sofia Larissa da Costa Paiva. 2025. An llm-enhanced framework for bridging simulators and game engines towards realistic 3d simulations. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM International Conference on Interac-tive Media Experiences , pages 402–405. Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Mered-ith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bern-stein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th an-nual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , pages 1–22. Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. 2023. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Alexander Raistrick, Lahav Lipson, Zeyu Ma, Lingjie Mei, Mingzhe Wang, Yiming Zuo, Karhan Kayan, Hongyu Wen, Beining Han, Yihan Wang, and 1 oth-ers. 2023. Infinite photorealistic worlds using proce-dural generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion , pages 12630–12641. SongTang SongTang, Kaiyong Zhao, Lei Wang, Yuliang Li, Xuebo Liu, Junyi Zou, Qiang Wang, and Xiaowen Chu. 2025. Unrealllm: Towards highly controllable and interactable 3d scene generation by llm-powered procedural content generation. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 19417–19435. Shyam Sudhakaran, Miguel González-Duque, Matthias Freiberger, Claire Glanois, Elias Najarro, and Sebas-tian Risi. 2023. Mariogpt: Open-ended text2level generation through large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:54213– 54227. Chunyi Sun, Junlin Han, Weijian Deng, Xinlong Wang, Zishan Qin, and Stephen Gould. 2025. 3d-gpt: Pro-cedural 3d modeling with large language models. In 

2025 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) ,pages 1253–1263. IEEE. Yuqian Sun, Zhouyi Li, Ke Fang, Chang Hee Lee, and Ali Asadipour. 2023. Language as reality: a co-creative storytelling game experience in 1001 nights using generative ai. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Dig-ital Entertainment , volume 19, pages 425–434. Weihao Tan, Xiangyang Li, Yunhao Fang, Heyuan Yao, Shi Yan, Hao Luo, Tenglong Ao, Huihui Li, Hongbin Ren, Bairen Yi, and 1 others. 2025. Lumine: An open recipe for building generalist agents in 3d open worlds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08892 .Graham Todd, Alexander G Padula, Matthew Stephen-son, Éric Piette, Dennis J Soemers, and Julian To-gelius. 2024. Gavel: Generating games via evolution and language models. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 37:110723–110745. Dani Valevski, Yaniv Leviathan, Moab Arar, and Shlomi Fruchter. 2025. Diffusion models are real-time game engines. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2024. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research .Shu Wang, Lei Ji, Renxi Wang, Wenxiao Zhao, Haokun Liu, Yifan Hou, and Ying Nian Wu. 2025. Explore the reasoning capability of llms in the chess testbed. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Na-tions of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 611–622. Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Shawn Ma, and Yitao Liang. 2023. De-scribe, explain, plan and select: interactive planning with llms enables open-world multi-task agents. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:34153–34189. Kazuki Wayama, Tomoyuki Yokogawa, Sousuke Amasaki, Hirohisa Aman, and Kazutami Arimoto. 2022. Verifying game logic in unreal engine 5 blueprint visual scripting system using model check-ing. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM Interna-tional Conference on Automated Software Engineer-ing , pages 1–8. Yongzhi Xu, Yonhon Ng, Yifu Wang, Inkyu Sa, Yun-fei Duan, Yang Li, Pan Ji, and Hongdong Li. 2024. Sketch2scene: Automatic generation of interactive 3d game scenes from user’s casual sketches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04567 .Runxin Yang, Yuxuan Wan, Shuqing Li, and Michael R Lyu. 2025. 90% faster, 100% code-free: Mllm-driven zero-code 3d game development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26161 .Hong-Xing Yu, Haoyi Duan, Junhwa Hur, Kyle Sargent, Michael Rubinstein, William T Freeman, Forrester Cole, Deqing Sun, Noah Snavely, Jiajun Wu, and 1 others. 2024. Wonderjourney: Going from anywhere to everywhere. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 6658–6667. Yibo Zhang, Li Zhang, Rui Ma, and Nan Cao. 2025. Texverse: A universe of 3d objects with high-resolution textures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10868 .Mengqi Zhou, Yuxi Wang, Jun Hou, Shougao Zhang, Yi-wei Li, Chuanchen Luo, Junran Peng, and Zhaoxiang Zhang. 2025. Scenex: Procedural controllable large-scale scene generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pages 10806–10814. 

A Appendix Figure 4: The descriptions and screenshots of all Easy games. Figure 5: The descriptions and screenshots of all Medium games. Figure 6: The descriptions and screenshots of all Hard games. Figure 7: The prompt details of Decompose in Section 3.2. 

Figure 8: The prompt details of Generate Obj in Section 3.3. Figure 9: The prompt details of Plan N ode in Section 3.4.1. Figure 10: The prompt details of Generate N ode in Section 3.4.2. Figure 11: The prompt details of Plan Code in Section 3.5. Figure 12: The prompt details of Generate Code in Section 3.5. Figure 13: The prompt details of Plan Int in Section 3.6. Figure 14: The prompt details of Generate Int in Section 3.6. Figure 15: The prompt details of Generate T est in Section 3.7. Figure 16: The prompt details of Overall Game Evaluation in Section 4.2. Figure 17: The prompt details of PCG Graph Evaluation in Section 4.4. Figure 18: The prompt details of PCG Graph Evaluation in Section 4.5.