Title: SDesc3D: Towards Layout-Aware 3D Indoor Scene Generation from Short Descriptions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01972v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 01:03:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# SDesc3D: Towards Layout-Aware 3D Indoor Scene Generation from Short Descriptions 

## Jie Feng 

jiefeng0109@163.com Xidian University China 

## Jiawei Shen 

jiaweishen@stu.xidian.edu.cn Xidian University China 

## Junjia Huang 

huangjj77@mail2.sys.edu.cn Sun Yat-sen University China 

## Junpeng Zhang 

junpengzhang@xidian.edu.cn Xidian University China 

## Mingtao Feng 

mintfeng@hnu.edu.cn Xidian University China 

## Weisheng Dong 

wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn Xidian University China 

## Guanbin Li ∗

liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn Sun Yat-sen University China On   

> Poor Detail Richness
> Low Structural Plausibility
> HSM Reason3D SDesc3D(Ours)
> Working
> Sleeping
> Watching
> Eating
> Organizing
> Next to
> Next to
> Next to
> On top of
> Relationship Pror Functionality-based spatial anchoring
> “A cozy
> bedroom”
> A cozy bedroom

Figure 1: Short descriptions condense semantics, making 3D indoor scene generation challenging in terms of physical plausibility and detail preservation. To address this, SDesc3D leverages object coherence priors and functionality-based spatial anchoring, achieving superior performance under such a challenging condition. 

## Abstract 

3D indoor scene generation conditioned on short textual descrip-tions provides a promising avenue for interactive 3D environment construction without the need for labor-intensive layout specifi-cation. Despite recent progress in text-conditioned 3D scene gen-eration, existing works suffer from poor physical plausibility and insufficient detail richness in such semantic condensation cases, largely due to their reliance on explicit semantic cues about com-positional objects and their spatial relationships. This limitation highlights the need for enhanced 3D reasoning capabilities, particu-larly in terms of prior integration and spatial anchoring. Motivated by this, we propose SDesc3D, a short-text conditioned 3D indoor scene generation framework, that leverages multi-view structural 

> ∗

Corresponding author. 

priors and regional functionality implications to enable 3D layout reasoning under sparse textual guidance. Specifically, we introduce a Multi-view scene prior augmentation that enriches underspeci-fied textual inputs with aggregated multi-view structural knowl-edge, shifting from inaccessible semantic relation cues to multi-view relational prior aggregation. Building on this, we design a Functionality-aware layout grounding, employing regional func-tionality grounding for implicit spatial anchors and conducting hierarchical layout reasoning to enhance scene organization and se-mantic plausibility. Furthermore, an Iterative reflection-rectification scheme is employed for progressive structural plausibility refine-ment via self-rectification. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms existing approaches on short-text conditioned 3D indoor scene generation. Code will be publicly available.  

> arXiv:2604.01972v1 [cs.CV] 2 Apr 2026 Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al.

## CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Scene understanding ; Intelli-gent agents ; Multi-agent planning. 

## Keywords 

3D indoor scene generation, 3D layout reasoning, Multi-view prior augmentation, Regional functionality partition. 

## 1 Introduction 

Driven by the increasing demand for immersive interactions, 3D indoor scene generation has emerged as a cornerstone across di-verse fields, from virtual content creation to embodied AI research, thanks to its ability to efficiently create interactive and scalable 3D environments while significantly reducing the manual effort required for scene modeling. In particular, recent advances in text-conditioned 3D scene generation offer great potential by enabling users to convert natural language descriptions into detailed 3D layouts and scenes. Pioneering works in this field have explored autoregressive[ 36 ] and diffusion[ 30 ] models to enforce semantic coherence between textual descriptions and generated scenes, how-ever, the generated scene diveristy is significantly constrained by the limited availability of large-scale 3D indoor scene datasets. With the emergence of large language models (LLMs), LLM-guided 3D scene generation has emerged as a new paradigm, which expands scene diversity by leveraging common-sense knowledge from text for reasoning about spatial layouts [2, 23]. Generating 3D indoor scenes from short descriptions, such as "a cozy bedroom ", provides a promising avenue for interactive 3D environment construction without the need for labor-intensive lay-out specification. Despite recent advancements in LLM-guided 3D scene generation, existing approaches fail to handle such a challeng-ing case with intense semantic condensation, due to their reliance on detailed scene descriptions that explicitly convey the semantic concepts of compositional elements as well as their corresponding spatial relationships. As illustrated in Fig. 1, when spatial relation-ships are omitted from a detailed scene description, the generated scenes often exhibit structurally implausible or physically invalid object arrangements. Furthermore, if details about the composi-tional elements are also omitted, the richness and fidelity of the generated scenes deteriorate noticeably. This highlights the critical gap in semantic richness and physical plausibility between seman-tic condensation in short textual description and the requirements for faithful 3D indoor scene generation. Compensating for the lack of explicit semantic guidance on ob-ject relationships plays a crucial role in short-text conditioned 3D indoor scene generation. To achieve this, RoomPlanner [ 29 ] ex-plores LLM-based description augmentation to expand short scene descriptions into executable and detailed descriptions, however, its performance remains limited by the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. In contrast, Scenethesis [ 20 ] utilizes an image generation model to extracts scene layouts from the generated images conditioned on augmented descriptions, thereby improving realism and physical plausibility through structural knowledge acquired from large-scale pretrained image generation models. Despite the potential of inte-grating auxiliary knowledge, using a single-view generated images remain limited in capturing the full 3D object arrangements, as view perspective, partial occlusion and fully missing object visibility can obscure crucial spatial relationships. This limitation motivates the use of multi-view priors to bridge the semantic gap arising from inaccessible semantic guidance. In this paper, we propose SDesc3D, a short-text conditioned 3D indoor scene generation framework, that leverages multi-view structural priors and regional functionality implications to enable 3D layout reasoning under sparse textual guidance. First, we pro-pose Multi-view scene prior augmentation (MSPA) to enriches short textual descriptions with priors aggregated from external multi-view scene resources. Our MSPA constructs a semantic scene prior memory by encoding multi-view indoor scenes into relational rep-resentations. For a given short scene description, relevant priors are retrieved to augment the description, providing generalized guidance on plausible spatial relationships for guiding subsequent 3D layout reasoning. With augmented scene description provides cues on possible object compositions and their coherence, plausible spatial arrangements remains unconstrained, due to the lack of spatial anchoring. To this end, we highligt that short scene descrip-tion and augmented priors provide valuable implications about the regional functionalities of the targeted scene, offering valuable cues on scene structure and organization at a coarser granular-ity, as illustrated in Figure 1. Building on this insight, we propose Functionality-aware Layout Grounding (FLG), where functionality zones are inferred by aggregating objects and leveraged as spa-tial anchors for reasoning about object-wise spatial arrangements. Furthermore, to maintain physical plausibility, we introduce an Iter-ative reflection-rectification (IRR) scheme that progressively refines the layout through a multi-stage and feedback-driven process. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We propose Multi-view scene prior augmentation to enrich short descriptions with aggregated multi-view structural knowledge, shifting guidance from inaccessible semantic relation cues to multi-view relational prior aggregation. 

• Our Functionality-aware layout grounding constructs a hi-erarchical layout reasoning process that leveraging regional functionalities for implicit spatial anchoring, leading to im-proved scene organization and semantic plausibility. 

• An Iterative reflection-rectification scheme is designed for progressively layout refinement by leveraging feedback from each refinement stage to improve physical plausibility while presenting over-deterministic corrections via continous re-evaluating. 

• Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms existing approaches on short-text conditioned 3D indoor scene generation, with enhanced physicial plausibility and improved detail richness. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Text-conditioned 3D Indoor Scene Generation 

Early 3D indoor scene generation mainly followed a data-driven layout synthesis paradigm [ 15 , 17 , 38 ], where plausible indoor en-vironments were produced by learning object co-occurrence pat-terns and spatial priors from scene datasets. While effective under restricted data distributions, such methods offered only limited SDesc3D: Towards Layout-Aware 3D Indoor Scene Generation from Short Descriptions Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Multi-view Scene Prior Augmentation  

> VLM
> Embedding
> &Indexing
> Scene Prior Memory
> Offline Construction
> Online Retrieval
> Query
> Encoding
> Augmented
> Scene Description
> External Multi-view Resources

“A cozy bedroom” 

Short User Prompt 

Functionality-aware Layout Grounding    

> sleeping
> working
> relaxing
> storage
> Explicit Structure
> Top-view Rendering
> Functional Zone Structure
> Diagnosis Agent
> {"issue_type": "object_collision",
> "collision_description": "The lamp base is colliding with the cabinet edge, causing the lamp to tilt outward.",
> "affected_objects": ["lamp", "cabinet"],
> "likely_cause": "The lamp is placed too close to the cabinet boundary with insufficient support under the base.",
> "repair_suggestion": "Move the lamp inward onto the cabinet top and keep the base fully supported.",}
> Collision Refinement Clearance Refinement

Iterative Reflection Rectification    

> Multi-view
> Scene
> Descriptions
> Functionality Partition Dominant Object Grounding Accessory Placement
> Scene-level
> Semantic Retrieval
> Generalized Prior
> Retrieval
> “A cozy bedroom”
> Diagnostic suggestions

Figure 2: Overview of our SDesc3D Framework. Given a short user descriptions, SDesc3D first performs Multi-view Scene Prior Augmentation to retrieve scene priors for sparse semantic completion. Next, Functionality-aware Layout Grounding leverages regional functionality implications to reason about a hierarchical layout in a coarse-fine manner. Finally, Iterative reflection-rectification is adopted to iteratively suppress residual physical and structural errors. 

support for text-conditioned generation [ 5], as scene composition was driven primarily by dataset regularities rather than explicit linguistic intent. With the development of large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models (VLMs), text-conditioned 3D indoor scene generation has evolved into a more open paradigm involving lan-guage understanding, asset retrieval, layout planning, and constraint-aware optimization. Representative methods include LayoutGPT [ 10 ], which maps natural language to layout representations through in-context learning; Holodeck [ 35 ], which integrates language un-derstanding, asset retrieval, and spatial constraint optimization into an open-vocabulary generation pipeline; LayoutVLM [ 27 ], which combines VLMs with differentiable optimization to improve se-mantic consistency and physical plausibility; and Reason3D [ 2 ] , which unifies scene planning, object retrieval, and constraint-aware placement within a stronger reasoning framework. Despite these advances, most existing methods [ 1 , 3 , 11 , 37 ] still rely on the same implicit premise: the input text already specifies the key structural cues required for generation, including candidate objects, spatial relations, and other layout-relevant constraints. In contrast, this work focuses on brighing the critical gap in semantic richness and physical plausibility between semantic condensation in short tex-tual description and the requirements for faithful 3D indoor scene generation. 

## 2.2 Hierarchical Reasoning for Progressive Generation 

Prior work [ 7 , 14 , 28 , 30 , 34 , 39 ] on controllable 3D scene gen-erationhas progressively moved from implicit scene modeling to-ward explicit layout representations. Early methods[ 18 , 21 , 22 ] were largely formulated at the object and relation levels, using scene graphs, relation graphs, or programmatic structures to encode ob-ject attributes, inter-object relations, and local spatial constraints, thereby improving structural interpretability and object-level con-trollability. Imaginarium [ 41 ] further extends this line by intro-ducing scene-graph optimization after vision-guided 3D layout recovery, strengthening post-generation structural correction. To improve structural organization in complex indoor scenes, subsequent works introduces hierarchical and multi-scale modeling that progressively unfolds scene generation in a coarse-to-fine man-ner. Architect [ 32 ] adopts hierarchical 2D inpainting for progressive large-scale 3D scene generation, HSM [ 23 ] models cross-scale sup-port regions and object compositions through hierarchical scene motifs, and HiScene [ 8 ] treats a scene as a hierarchy of decom-posable entities to preserve consistency between global structure and local instances. Compared with purely local relation-based formulations, these methods strengthen multi-level structural or-ganization in progressive generation. However, their hierarchical mechanisms remain largely grounded in support relations, local compositional patterns, or structural priors, and are therefore better suited to organizing existing layout elements than to revealing the intermediate structure required for layout reasoning under sparse descriptions. Under short scene descriptions, stable spatial anchors Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. 

are often absent, while the implicit functionality cues embedded in text remain underexploited. 

## 2.3 Post-reasoning Layout Optimization 

After an initial layout is generated, residual geometric conflicts and local inconsistencies may still remain, making post-reasoning layout optimization necessary for improving physical plausibility. Early approaches [ 4, 24 , 31 , 40 ] mainly treat this stage as local post-hoc repair, resolving explicit violations such as object penetration, boundary overflow and unstable placement through collision han-dling, constraint solving, or rule-based geometric adjustment. For example, PhyScene [ 34 ] improves layout feasibility with physical and interaction constraints, while FirePlace [ 14 ] further rectifies object placement through geometric constraint construction and solving. Despite their effectiveness, these methods still focus on exposed local defects in a single shot rather than optimizing the intermediate layout for progressive refinement. More recent methods [ 13 , 19 , 25 ] introduce feedback and tool-assisted refinement. SceneWeaver [ 33 ] integrates iterative scene synthesis with a LLM-based refinement tool, while DisCo-Layout [ 12 ]decouples semantic and physical refinement via multi-agent collab-oration. However, their refinement remains largely violation-driven, with correction solely applied to defects revealed at current step. As a result, existing one-shot and iterative adjustment may improve local feasibility, yet still compromise scene-level structure and se-mantic consistency. In this work, we formulate post-reasoning layout optimization as a multi-step reflection-rectification process while preserving the global scene structure. 

## 3 Methodology 

We begin by formulating the task of 3D indoor scene generation conditioned on a short description. Given a short scene description 

𝑑 , such as " a cozy bedroom ", which only provides the scene type, the goal is to generate a 3D indoor scene 𝑠 without relying on explicit de-scription about the internal compositional object instances and their spatial relationships. This necessitates strong reasoning abilities in inferring compositional objects and their spatial arrangements, while ensuring alignment with physical and functional plausibility under minimal guidance from a condensed description. To achieve this goal, we introduce SDesc3D, a short-text con-ditioned 3D indoor scene generation framework, that leverages multi-view structural priors and regional functionality implications to enable 3D layout reasoning under sparse textual guidance. As illustrated in Figure 2, our SDesc3D consists of three core compo-nents: Multi-view Scene Prior Augmentation, Functionality-aware Layout Grounding and Iterative Reflection-Rectification. Given a short scene description 𝑑 , multi-view scene prior augmentation pro-duces an augmented scene description with assistance of multi-view scene priors (Section 3.1). Based on the augmented scene descrip-tion 𝑑 aug , functionality-aware layout grounding is then employed to construct an initial layout G0 in a hierarchical manner (Section 3.3). Subsequently, the obtained functionality-aware layout G0 is passed to our Iterative Reflection-Rectification for progressive refinement (Section 3.4). 

## 3.1 Multi-view Scene Prior Augmentation 

A core obstacle in 3D indoor scene generation conditioned on short and under-specified descriptions is the absence of semantic cues regarding detailed composition and object relationships, necessi-tating the demands on auxiliary priors in 3D layout reasoning. Visual guidance has shown promising capability in providing scene priors [ 20 ], however, it suffers from unsatisfactory scene under-standing, due to partial occlusion and fully missing object visibility from a single-view perspective. To mitigate this issue, we propose Multi-view scene prior augmentation (MSPA), which enriches short textual descriptions with priors aggregated from multi-view images. Instead of extracting object arrangements directly from a gener-ated image, MSPA constructs a semantic scene prior memory by encoding multi-view indoor scenes from external resources into relational representations. Given a short scene description, relevant priors are retrieved based on semantic or generalized similarity and used to augment the description, providing generalized guidance on plausible spatial relationships for guiding subsequent 3D layout reasoning. 

Offline Multi-view Scene Prior Construction. To provide guidance on object relationships that is otherwise inaccessible, a multi-view scene prior memory is constructed from external scene resources. Specifically, we collect multi-view indoor images from ScanNet [ 6] and SpatialGen [ 9]. For the 𝑖 -th collected scene, we sample 𝑁 images from distinct perspectives and group them into a multi-view observation unit V𝑖 , providing a comprehensive view of object relationships in the scene. Then we employ the vision-language model Gemini-3 Flash to jointly parse the observation unit V𝑖 into three complementary types of textual descriptions, 

{I 𝑖 

> sum

, I𝑖 

> rel

, I𝑖  

> scale

} = Φvlm (V 𝑖 ), (1) where I (𝑖 ) 

> sum

encodes a brief summary on the scene type, and I (𝑖 )

> rel

contains detailed textual descriptions on object relationships. I (𝑖 )

> scale

captures the relative object scales in the given scene. Based on these parsed descriptions, each scene’s type summary, object relationships and scale information are organized into a structured scene entry 𝜏 𝑖 , which serves as the basic unit of the scene prior memory. Inspired by [ 10 ], we encode each structured scene entry in the structural programming language, for exploring the spatial reasoning capabilities of LLMs. By traversing all collected multi-view scenes, a scene prior memory is constructed as 

M = {( 𝜏 𝑖 , 𝑧 𝑖 )} | M |  

> 𝑖 =1

, (2) where 𝑧 𝑖 refers to the embedding of 𝑖 -th entry’s summary 𝜏 𝑖 for indexing. By this way, the constructed memory M stores both multi-view scene priors and their semantic embeddings, thus supporting efficient similarity-based retrieval from short scene descriptions in our next stage. 

Retrieval-based Online Prior Augmentation. Given a short scene description 𝑑 , we propose augmenting the condensed descrip-tion with retrieved scene priors from the constructed scene prior memory M. To achieve this, we first define a scene-level seman-tic retrieval score based on the semantic similarity between the scene summary of each memory entry 𝑧 𝑖 and the given short scene description 𝑑 ,

𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑡 (𝑑, 𝜏 𝑖 ) = cos (𝑑, 𝑧 𝑖 ), (3) SDesc3D: Towards Layout-Aware 3D Indoor Scene Generation from Short Descriptions Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

where we omit the explicit embedding operator applied to 𝑑 for ease of notation. Then, the top-𝐾 memory entries with highest retrieval scores are collected to construct an aggregated scene prior pack-age for description augmentation, denoted as P𝑎𝑢𝑔 . This package provides rich semantic guidance on compositional objects and ob-ject arrangements, drawing from the memory entries with similar scene-level semantic similarities. While scene-level semantic similarity-based retrieval often yields effective priors, it can also aggregate misleading priors from unre-lated scenes due to limited scene-type coverage in M. When no suf-ficient semantic similarity is found, i.e. , when max | M |  

> 𝑖 =1

𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑡 (𝑑, 𝜏 𝑖 ) ≤ 

𝜃 𝑟𝑒𝑡 with 𝜃 𝑟𝑒𝑡 being a pre-set threshold, we propose an alternative retrieval scheme to aggregate generalized object relationships from the prior memory instead. To this end, we define a generalized prior retrieval score based on the Best matching-25 (BM25) ranking function [26] as 

𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑡 (𝑑, 𝜏 𝑖 ) = BM25 (𝑑, 𝜏 𝑖 ), (4) where the short description 𝑑 is temporarily enriched with potential objects and used to quantify its relationship with 𝜏 𝑖 based on the term occurrences. By adopting this retrieval score, priors with possibly similar compositional objects are aggregated to provide generalized knowledge on their spatial relationships. Similarly, a prior package P𝑎𝑢𝑔 is constructed by selecting memory entries with top-K retrieval scores. Finally, the augmented scene description is constructed by com-bining the given short description with the retrieved prior package, 

𝑑 aug = (𝑑, Paug ), (5) bridging the semantic gap arising from inaccessible semantic guid-ance by enhanced scene priors on plausible layouts as well as gen-eralized object spatial relationships. 

## 3.2 Main Results 3.3 Functionality-aware Layout Grounding 

While our MSPA enriches the scene description with detailed se-mantic priors about compositional object instances and their spatial relationships, layout reasoning remains a challenging problem, due to the absence of spatial anchors in textual descriptions. Beyond these explicit spatial relationships, the augmented description also provides valuable implications about the regional functionalities of the targeted scene, offering valuable cues on scene structure and organization at a coarser granularity. Building on this insight, we propose Functionality-aware Layout Grounding (FLG), where functionality zones are inferred by aggregating objects and lever-aged as spatial anchors for reasoning about object-wise spatial arrangements. Specifically, we partition the scene into functionality zones at a coarse semantic granularity. At a finer level, each zone is composed of one or more dominant objects, along with optional accessories, capturing both the core and supplementary elements that characterize the zone’s intended function. To obtain such a hierarchical layout conditioned on the aug-mented description 𝑑 aug , we start with extracting functionality cues from the augmented description 𝑑 aug and grounding extracted func-tionalities into spatial regions via an LLM agent. This formulates a process as 

(Z , F ) = Φlayout (𝑑 aug ), (6) where Z refers to the set of functionality zones, with each zone Z𝑖 

associated with a functionality type F𝑖 .Then, starting from an empty layout O0 = ∅, dominant objects are progressively arranged by traversing all functionality zones, 

O𝑡 = Φlayout (𝑑 aug , Z𝑡 , F𝑖 , 𝐶 (Z 𝑡 )|O 𝑡 −1), ∀𝑡 ∈ { 1, · · · , |Z|} , (7) where Z𝑡 serves as a spatial anchor for local arrangement of dom-inating objects, and 𝐶 (Z 𝑡 ) refers to boundary constraint derived from Z𝑡 . Since the functionality partition in real scenes does not strictly adhere to rigid boundaries, the constraint 𝐶 (Z 𝑡 ) is defined in a relaxed manner to allow flexible object arrangement across adjacent functionality zones. For each functionality zone Z𝑡 , the constraint 𝐶 (Z 𝑡 ) is composed of two spatially expanded boundaries with decreasing priorities, 

𝐶 (Z 𝑡 ) = {𝐶 buf (Z 𝑡 ), 𝐶 int (Z 𝑡 )} , s.t. 𝐶 buf (Z 𝑡 ) ⊂ 𝐶 int (Z 𝑡 ), (8) where 𝐶 buf (Z 𝑡 ) creates an additional buffer for handling inter-object clearance. The remaining 𝐶 int (Z 𝑡 ) constructs an interactive space between adjacent functionality zones, and object arrangement is permitted with lower priority if the targeted space is unoccupied. Subsequently, with the dominant object layout ˆO = O | Z | , we apply a finer-grained layout reasoning to arrange the accessories se-mantically linked with each dominant object, thus complementing its supporting functionality: 

A𝑡 = Φlayout (𝑑 aug , ˆO𝑡 , 𝐶 ( ˆO𝑡 ), 𝑆 ( ˆO𝑡 )|A 𝑡 −1), ∀𝑡 ∈ { 1, · · · , | ˆO|} ,

(9) where A0 = ∅, and an additional set of accessory arrangement criteria 𝑆 ( ˆO𝑡 ) is employed by following the identical settings from HSM [ 23 ]. The final accessory layout is then denoted as ˆA = A | ˆO | .Finally, a scene layout conditioned on the augmented scene description is constructed as 

G0 = {Z , ˆO, ˆA, H, R} (10) where H encodes the hierarchical relationships of the generated layout, and R captures the inter-object relationship at each semantic granularity. By this functionality-aware and hierarchical reasoning design, the obtained layout demonstrates well-grounded function-ality, enhanced spatial anchoring and improved scene richness. 

## 3.4 Iterative Reflection-Rectification 

Through our MSPA and FLG, the initial layout generated from a condensed scene descrition exhibits strong semantic plausibility and rich compositional objects, while it may not fully ensure physi-cial plausibilty, resulting in geometric violations such as object penetration, insufficient clearance and out-of-bound placement. To maintain physical plausibility, existing approaches commonly employ a single-pass post-reasoning refinement to adjust object arrangements based on geometric criteria, which can introduce over-deterministic corrections and compromise scene integrity. In contrast, we introduce an Iterative reflection-rectification (IRR) scheme that progressively refines the layout through a multi-stage and feedback-driven process. To achieve this, our IRR incorporates an LLM-guided diagnosis agent for identifying potential geometric violations and providing refinement suggestions at each interme-diate layout, after which rectifications by a set of external tools Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. 

Table 1: Quantitative comparison under the short-text 3D indoor scene generation setting. Compared with HSM and Reason3D, our method achieves improved overall performance.                                                              

> Method Collision (%) ↓OOB (%) ↓OP ↑AO ↑DR ↑ZO ↑CR ↑FC ↑AI-Avg ↑
> Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4
> HSM (3DV 2026) [23] 9.36% 8.67% 9.31 8.83 9.34 8.96 7.83 7.47 8.32 8.61 7.73 7.48 8.51 7.96 8.51 8.22 Reason3D (AAAI 2026) [2] 18.62% 12.55% 8.87 8.32 9.32 8.99 7.87 7.94 8.81 8.63 7.69 7.43 8.07 7.86 8.44 8.20 Ours 5.36% 7.70% 9.15 8.89 9.26 8.71 8.21 8.24 9.67 9.04 9.02 8.56 9.03 9.01 9.06 8.74 HSM Reason3D SDesc3D(Ours)
> A classical dining room A bright kitchen A modern living room A tidy laundry room A cozy bathroom

Figure 3: Qualitive comparison on the scenes generated on five different short descriptions. Our method achieves better overall scene quality than the compared approaches in terms of physical plausibility and detail richness. 

is applied according for continous re-evaluting in the subsequent stage. At each intermediate stage 𝑡 , to complement the obtained layout 

G𝑡 −1 in structured programming language with auxiliary visual guidance, a top-down view image I𝑡 −1 is rendered, providing global contextual cues and spatial awareness that facilitate informed diag-nose regarding structural violations. The intermediate layout G𝑡 −1,together with the rendered image I𝑡 −1, is then fed to our LLM-guided diagnosis agent Φdiag (· · · ) for producing a textual diagnosis report, 

D𝑡 = Φdiag (G 𝑡 −1, I𝑡 −1, T 0: 𝑡 −1), (11) where the refinement trace T 0: 𝑡 −1, containing the historical di-agnoses and refinement feedbacks, is also incorporated to enable history-aware evaluation and stablize the refinement trajectory. Since the obtained textual diagnosis alone cannot serve as a qualitive indicator, we define a layout penalty score by parsing the identified violations in D𝑡 as 

𝑝 D𝑡 = 𝜆 𝑝𝑒𝑛 𝑁 𝑝𝑒𝑛 + 𝜆 𝑐𝑙𝑟 𝑁 𝑐𝑙𝑟 + 𝜆 𝑜𝑜𝑏 𝑁 𝑜𝑜𝑏 , (12) where 𝑁 𝑝𝑒𝑛 , 𝑁 𝑐𝑙𝑟 , and 𝑁 𝑜𝑜𝑏 denote the number of penetration pairs, object pairs with insufficient local clearance, and out-of-bound objects in D𝑡 , respectively. The corresponding weighting factors, 

𝜆 pen , 𝜆 clr and 𝜆 oob , control the relative importance of each violation type. For an intermediate layout with a layout penalty score greater than a pre-set threshold, 𝑝 D𝑡 ≥ 𝜃 𝑝 , a set of external rectification tools are applied to correct geometric violations. In this work, we employ a clearance refinement tool to resolve improper distances among neighboring objects, based on the suggestions associated in the diagnosis report D𝑡 . At the same time, a collision refinement tool is adopted for handling the object penetration and out-of-bound issues. The iterative refinement continues until either the layout penalty score falls below the threshold, 𝑝 D𝑡 < 𝜏 𝑝 , or the maximum number of refinement steps is reached, at which point the final lay-out is produced. Despite the simplicity of our adopted rectification tools, the effectiveness of our IRR is ensured, as it enables progres-sive error identification and correction across multiple refinement steps. Additional details on our rectification tools are provided in the supplementary material. SDesc3D: Towards Layout-Aware 3D Indoor Scene Generation from Short Descriptions Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

## 4 Experiment 4.1 Implementation and evaluation details 

For fair comparison, SDesc3D is evaluated under the same short-text setting, room-boundary constraints and shared 3D assets with the compared LLM-guided baselines. All methods use a unified room scale configuration and a common object retrieval space constructed from Habitat Synthetic Scenes Dataset (HSSD-200) [ 16 ], ensuring consistency in both asset sourcing and scene composition. For performance evaluation, we evaluate 50 test scenes and repeat each scene 10 times, reporting average results per-scene and over all scenes. For ablation study, we repeatedly evaluate the representative scene “A cozy bedroom” for 20 runs and report averaged metrics. 

Implementation details. Following [ 2 ], SDesc3D is instanti-ated with Gemini 3 Flash. The multi-view prior memory is con-structed from 144 reference scenes, each associated with 6 views. For each input short description, the top-3 most relevant priors are retrieved for augmentation. The temperature is set to 0.3 for suggestion generation and 0.7 for all other LLM agents. For layout quality evaluation in Equation (12), we use a threshold 𝜃 𝑝 = 3.5,with 𝜆 pen = 0.3, 𝜆 clr = 0.2 and 𝜆 oob = 0.5. Additional details are provided in the supplementary material. 

Evaluation metrics. We evaluate the generated scenes from four complementary perspectives: physical plausibility, structural and semantic alignment, functional composition completeness, and scene richness. Collision (%) and OOB (%) measure the degree of inter-object collision and the proportion of out-of-bound ob-jects, respectively. To assess whether short-text intent is effectively grounded into fine-grained scene structure, we further employ Gemini 3 Flash and GPT-5.4 as independent AI judges. Semantic evaluation is organized into three categories: physical and structural plausibility, including Object Placement(OP) and Alignment and Order(AO); functional composition, including Functional Complete-ness(FC), Zone Organization(ZO), and Cross-zone Relation(CR); and scene richness, including Detail Richness(DR). The mean of all semantic scores is reported as AI-Avg. We further conduct a user study with 20 participants. For each of the two paired score sets composed of AI-Avg and User-Avg on the same scenes, we report both 𝑃𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑜𝑛 and 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑛 correlation coefficients to quantify the consistency between automatic evaluation and human judg-ment. Additional details on evaluation metrics are provided in the supplementary material. 

Table 2: User study of different methods under the short-text 3D indoor scene generation setting. Our method achieves the best results across all evaluated metrics.                             

> Method OP ↑AO ↑DR ↑ZO ↑CR ↑FC ↑User-Avg ↑
> HSM (3DV 2026) [23] 7.26 7.72 7.46 7.40 7.52 7.49 7.48 Reason3D (AAAI 2026) [2] 7.15 7.40 7.36 7.00 6.94 7.44 7.22 Ours 8.64 8.85 8.69 8.74 8.77 8.56 8.71

Qualitative Comparison. As shown in Fig. 3, under short-text inputs, both HSM and Reason3D fail to consistently recover in-door layouts with sufficient completeness and clear organization. Reason3D largely remains at a coarse-grained generation level dom-inated by a few major furniture items, often resulting in missing auxiliary objects, insufficient functional support, and weak cross-region structure. Although HSM is able to generate more objects, it still frequently produces loose object compositions, ambiguous functional boundaries, and local configurations that are not fully aligned with the intended scene semantics. In contrast, our method recovers more complete object sets from concise prompts and fur-ther establishes clearer functional partitioning and more coherent spatial organization, while maintaining better local arrangement stability and global layout consistency. This advantage comes from the joint effect of multi-view scene prior augmentation(MSPA), functionality-aware layout grounding(FLG) and iterative reflection-rectification(IRR), which together enable more effective object com-pletion and layout structuring from sparse semantics, thereby sub-stantially improving generation quality in the short-text setting. 

Quantitative Comparison. Table 1 shows that our method achieves the best physical plausibility, reducing Collision and OOB to 5.36% and 7.70%, respectively, both substantially lower than those of HSM and Reason3D. More importantly, under both AI judges, our method performs best on DR, ZO, CR, FC, and AI-Avg, with the most consistent gains observed on ZO, CR, and FC. These re-sults show that our method not only recovers missing objects and fine-grained details from short-text inputs, but also more effectively establishes clear functional partitioning, coherent cross-zone rela-tions, and complete scene structure. In contrast, although HSM and Reason3D obtain slightly better results on a few OP or AO scores, such advantages are largely confined to local placement quality; our method is stronger in functional composition, scene richness, and overall structural recovery, which are more critical for fine-grained layout modeling under short-text conditions. The user ratings in Table 2 further support this trend. Our method ranks first on all human evaluation criteria, indicating that human judgments likewise favor its advantages in object completeness, region-level organization, and overall coherence. 

## 4.2 Ablation Study 

We conduct a cumulative ablation over three key components: MSPA, FLG, and IRR. Table 3 shows that these modules play succes-sive roles in short-text scene generation: MSPA mainly compensates for missing scene priors under sparse semantics, FLG further es-tablishes region-level structural organization, and IRR primarily improves physical plausibility and placement precision in the final layouts. 

MSPA. Relative to the base configuration without MSPA, FLG, or IRR, introducing MSPA markedly reduces Collision/OOB from 38.66%/26.72% to 19.56%/13.67%, while improving AI-Avg from 6.36/6.15 to 8.18/7.74. Meanwhile, OP increases from 7.41/7.02 to 7.85/7.42, and FC from 4.78/4.56 to 8.31/7.53; the remaining struc-tural and functional metrics also improve consistently. These results indicate that MSPA is necessary for recovering missing scene priors and restoring the basic scene structure under short-text input. 

FLG. Building on MSPA, enabling FLG yields stable performance gains. Collision/OOB further decrease to 14.28%/8.33%, while AI-Avg improves to 9.04/8.45. Meanwhile, ZO increases from 8.12/7.76 to 9.16/8.71, and CR from 8.14/7.68 to 9.44/8.36; the remaining structural and functional metrics also continue to improve. This shows that FLG provides the critical intermediate structure between Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. 

Table 3: Ablation study of our SDesc3D framework under the short-text 3D indoor scene generation setting. MSPA, FLG, and IRR are added progressively to analyze their individual and joint contributions. Each added component consistently improves the results, with the complete model performing best across nearly all metrics.                                                                           

> MSPA FLG IRR Collision (%) ↓OOB (%) ↓DR ↑OP ↑ZO ↑CR ↑FC ↑AI-Avg ↑
> Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4 Gemini 3-flash GPT 5.4
> 38.66% 26.72% 7.43 7.26 7.41 7.02 6.13 6.05 6.05 5.88 4.78 4.56 6.36 6.15
> ✓19.56% 13.67% 8.48 8.30 7.85 7.42 8.12 7.76 8.14 7.68 8.31 7.53 8.18 7.74
> ✓✓14.28% 8.33% 9.05 8.89 8.04 7.65 9.16 8.71 9.44 8.36 9.52 8.62 9.04 8.45
> ✓✓✓5.44% 6.73% 9.21 9.03 9.25 8.98 9.54 9.21 9.53 8.88 9.88 8.76 9.48 8.97

Table 4: Correlation Coefficient between User and AI Scores. The results suggest a positive correlation between user judg-ments and AI-based evaluations.         

> Metric User-AI Score Pair 1 User-AI Score Pair 2
> Pearson 𝑟 0.81 0.76 Spearman 𝜌 0.73 0.69

high-level scene intent and fine-grained layout recovery, thereby strengthening both region-level organization and cross-zone struc-tural reasoning. 

IRR. Further enabling IRR leads to additional improvements in both physical plausibility and final layout quality. Collision/OOB further decrease from 14.28%/8.33% to 5.44%/6.73% while AI-Avg improves from 9.04/8.45 to 9.48/8.97. Meanwhile, OP increases from 8.04/7.65 to 9.25/8.98, and FC from 9.52/8.62 to 9.88/8.76; the re-maining structural and functional metrics also continue to improve. These results show that IRR effectively resolves residual physical conflicts and local instability, while further improving final layout quality. 

Human-AI score correlation. In Table 4, both the Pearson 𝑟 

and Spearman 𝜌 between user ratings and AI scores are signifi-cantly positive, indicating strong agreement between automatic semantic evaluation and human judgment and thereby supporting the reliability of the automatic analysis. 

## 4.3 Comparison on Long-text Conditioned Generation 

As shown in Figure 4, under long-text inputs, all methods bene-fit from richer object, attribute, and spatial-relation constraints, leading to more complete indoor scenes. In this setting, SDesc3D performs comparably to HSM and Reason3D, recovering the major object compositions and local relations described in the text while maintaining clear scene organization and semantic consistency. These results indicate that although SDesc3D is primarily designed for structural semantic recovery under short-text conditions, its effectiveness is not limited to semantically condensed inputs. When richer layout cues are provided, multi-view scene prior augmen-tation and functionality-aware layout grounding remain effective, suggesting that the framework generalizes well to more descriptive input conditions and continues to support fine-grained, structured scene generation. 

Table 5: Model comparison results. The results indicate that our SDesc3D framework exhibits strong robustness across different foundation models.             

> Model GPT5.4 Gemini3-flash
> GPT5.4 8.72 8.89 Gemini3-flash 8.74 9.06 Qwen3 8.67 8.94 Claude-sonnet-4-6 8.70 9.03 (a) HSM (b ) Reason3D (c ) Ours
> A gym-purpose basement featuring a treadmill and an exercise bike positioned against one wall, with a tall mirror mounted on a wall directly facing the exercise bike.

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of HSM, Reason3D, and our method under the long-text setting. 

## 4.4 Analysis on Different LLM Backends. 

We further investigate the performance robustness of SDesc3D across different LLM backends. As present in Table 5, when the rea-soning backend is replaced with GPT-5.4, Gemini 3 Flash, Qwen3, and Claude-sonnet-4-6, the generated scenes remain in a consis-tently high-performing range under both AI judges with only lim-ited variations, indicating that the effectiveness of the proposed framework does not rely on a single reasoning model and instead generalizes well across different backends. 

## 4.5 Extending SDesc3D for Indoor Scene Editing 

As shown in Fig. 5, SDesc3D also exhibits strong potential for exten-sion to 3D indoor scene editing. Enabled by fine-grained functional partitioning and structured scene representation, the framework supports localized editing operations while preserving overall lay-out consistency and spatial organization stability. This suggests that SDesc3D does not merely produce a one-shot static layout, but instead captures a fine-grained scene structure with persistent manipulability, thereby providing an extensible representational basis for interactive 3D indoor content creation. SDesc3D: Towards Layout-Aware 3D Indoor Scene Generation from Short Descriptions Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Initial Scene  Add a mirror next to the bookshelf. 

> Delete a lamp in the scene.
> Move the armchair from the right side of the sofa to the left.

Figure 5: Examples of scene editing results of object addition, deletion and relocation by SDesc3D. Without additional treat-ments, SDesc3D handles these editing actions with plausible results. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In our work, we present SDesc3D for indoor layout reasoning con-ditioned on short scene descriptions. To compensate for the lack of explicit semantic guidance on object relationships, our multi-view scene prior augmentation to enrich short descriptions with ag-gregated multi-view structural knowledge, shifting guidance from inaccessible semantic relation cues to multi-view relational prior aggregation. Our functionality-aware layout grounding constructs a hierarchical layout reasoning process that leveraging regional functionalities for implicit spatial anchoring, leading to improved scene organization and semantic plausibility. Experiments validates the superiority of SDesc3D with enhanced physicial plausibility and improved detail richness. With its functionality partitioning and hierarchical scene representation, SDesc3D can also be extended for text-based scene editing without additional treatments. 

## References 

[1] Rio Aguina-Kang, Maxim Gumin, Do Heon Han, Stewart Morris, Seung Jean Yoo, Aditya Ganeshan, R. Kenny Jones, Qiuhong Anna Wei, Kailiang Fu, and Daniel Ritchie. 2024. Open-Universe Indoor Scene Generation using LLM Program Synthesis and Uncurated Object Databases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09675 

(2024). [2] Frédéric Berdoz, Luca A. Lanzendörfer, Nick Tuninga, and Roger Wattenhofer. 2026. Text-to-Scene with Large Reasoning Models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 40. 2435–2443. [3] Ata Celen, Guo Han, Konrad Schindler, Luc Van Gool, Iro Armeni, Anton Obukhov, and Xi Wang. 2024. I-Design: Personalized LLM Interior Designer. In 

Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 Workshops .[4] Adrian Chang, Kai Wang, Yuanbo Li, Manolis Savva, Angel X. Chang, and Daniel Ritchie. 2025. Learning Object Placement Programs for Indoor Scene Synthesis with Iterative Self Training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04496 (2025). [5] Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. Learning Spatial Knowledge for Text to 3D Scene Generation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 2028–2038. [6] Angela Dai, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner. 2017. ScanNet: Richly-Annotated 3D Reconstructions of Indoor Scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 5828–5839. [7] Wei Deng, Mengshi Qi, and Huadong Ma. 2025. Global-Local Tree Search in VLMs for 3D Indoor Scene Generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 8975–8984. [8] Wenqi Dong, Bangbang Yang, Zesong Yang, Yuan Li, Tao Hu, Hujun Bao, Yuewen Ma, and Zhaopeng Cui. 2025. HiScene: Creating Hierarchical 3D Scenes with Iso-metric View Generation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia . 9783–9792. [9] Chuan Fang, Heng Li, Yixun Liang, Jia Zheng, Yongsen Mao, Yuan Liu, Rui Tang, Zihan Zhou, and Ping Tan. 2026. SPATIALGEN: Layout-guided 3D Indoor Scene Generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) .[10] Weixi Feng, Wanrong Zhu, Tsu-Jui Fu, Varun Jampani, Arjun Akula, Xuehai He, Sugato Basu, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang. 2023. LayoutGPT: Compositional Visual Planning and Generation with Large Language Models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .[11] Rao Fu, Zehao Wen, Zichen Liu, and Srinath Sridhar. 2024. AnyHome: Open-Vocabulary Generation of Structured and Textured 3D Homes. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024 . 52–70. [12] Jialin Gao, Donghao Zhou, Mingjian Liang, Lihao Liu, Chi-Wing Fu, Xiaowei Hu, and Pheng-Ann Heng. 2025. DisCo-Layout: Disentangling and Coordinating Semantic and Physical Refinement in a Multi-Agent Framework for 3D Indoor Layout Synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02178 (2025). [13] Ziniu Hu, Ahmet Iscen, Aashi Jain, Thomas Kipf, Yisong Yue, David A. Ross, Cordelia Schmid, and Alireza Fathi. 2024. SceneCraft: An LLM Agent for Syn-thesizing 3D Scenes as Blender Code. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning . 19252–19282. [14] Ian Huang, Yanan Bao, Karen Truong, Howard Zhou, Cordelia Schmid, Leonidas Guibas, and Alireza Fathi. 2025. FirePlace: Geometric Refinements of LLM Com-mon Sense Reasoning for 3D Object Placement. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 13466–13476. [15] Shi-Sheng Huang, Hongbo Fu, and Shi-Min Hu. 2016. Structure Guided Interior Scene Synthesis via Graph Matching. Graphical Models 85 (2016), 46–55. [16] Mukul Khanna, Yongsen Mao, Hanxiao Jiang, Sanjay Haresh, Brennan Shacklett, Dhruv Batra, Alexander Clegg, Eric Undersander, Angel X. Chang, and Manolis Savva. 2024. Habitat Synthetic Scenes Dataset (HSSD-200): An Analysis of 3D Scene Scale and Realism Tradeoffs for ObjectGoal Navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 16384–16393. [17] Manyi Li, Akshay Gadi Patil, Kai Xu, Siddhartha Chaudhuri, Owais Khan, Ariel Shamir, Changhe Tu, Baoquan Chen, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Hao (Richard) Zhang. 2019. GRAINS: Generative Recursive Autoencoders for INdoor Scenes. ACM Transactions on Graphics 38, 2 (2019), 12:1–12:16. [18] Chenguo Lin and Yadong Mu. 2024. InstructScene: Instruction-Driven 3D In-door Scene Synthesis with Semantic Graph Prior. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .[19] Yangkai Lin, Jiabao Lei, and Kui Jia. 2025. SceneLCM: End-to-End Layout-Guided Interactive Indoor Scene Generation with Latent Consistency Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07091 (2025). [20] Lu Ling, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yifan Ding, Yu Zeng, Yichen Sheng, Yunhao Ge, Ming-Yu Liu, Aniket Bera, and Max Li. 2026. Scenethesis: A Language and Vision Agentic Framework for 3D Scene Generation. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2026) .[21] Libin Liu, Shen Chen, Sen Jia, Jingzhe Shi, Can Jin, Zongkai Wu, Jenq-Neng Hwang, and Lei Li. 2025. Graph Canvas for Controllable 3D Scene Generation. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia . 2536–2545. [22] Andrew Luo, Zhoutong Zhang, Jiajun Wu, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2020. End-to-End Optimization of Scene Layout. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 3754–3763. [23] Hou In Derek Pun, Hou In Ivan Tam, Austin T. Wang, Xiaoliang Huo, Angel X. Chang, and Manolis Savva. 2026. HSM: Hierarchical Scene Motifs for Multi-Scale Indoor Scene Generation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) .[24] Siyuan Qi, Yixin Zhu, Siyuan Huang, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Song-Chun Zhu. 2018. Human-Centric Indoor Scene Synthesis Using Stochastic Grammar. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 5899– 5908. [25] Xingjian Ran, Yixuan Li, Linning Xu, Mulin Yu, and Bo Dai. 2025. Direct Numer-ical Layout Generation for 3D Indoor Scene Synthesis via Spatial Reasoning. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .[26] Stephen E. Robertson, Steve Walker, Susan Jones, Micheline Hancock-Beaulieu, and Mike Gatford. 1995. Okapi at TREC-3. In Proceedings of the Third Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-3) . 109–126. [27] Fan-Yun Sun, Weiyu Liu, Siyi Gu, Dylan Lim, Goutam Bhat, Federico Tombari, Manling Li, Nick Haber, and Jiajun Wu. 2025. LayoutVLM: Differentiable Opti-mization of 3D Layout via Vision-Language Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 29469–29478. [28] Weilin Sun, Xinran Li, Manyi Li, Kai Xu, Xiangxu Meng, and Lei Meng. 2025. Hierarchically-Structured Open-Vocabulary Indoor Scene Synthesis with Pre-trained Large Language Model. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .[29] Wenzhuo Sun, Mingjian Liang, Wenxuan Song, Xuelian Cheng, and Zongyuan Ge. 2025. RoomPlanner: Explicit Layout Planner for Easier LLM-Driven 3D Room Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Trovato et al. 

Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.17048 (2025). [30] Jiapeng Tang, Yinyu Nie, Lev Markhasin, Angela Dai, Justus Thies, and Matthias Nießner. 2024. DiffuScene: Denoising Diffusion Models for Generative Indoor Scene Synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 20507–20518. [31] Kai Wang, Yu-An Lin, Ben Weissmann, Manolis Savva, Angel X. Chang, and Daniel Ritchie. 2019. PlanIT: Planning and Instantiating Indoor Scenes with Relation Graph and Spatial Prior Networks. ACM Transactions on Graphics 38, 4 (2019), 132:1–132:15. [32] Yian Wang, Xiaowen Qiu, Jiageng Liu, Zhehuan Chen, Jiting Cai, Yufei Wang, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Zhou Xian, and Chuang Gan. 2024. ARCHITECT: Generating Vivid and Interactive 3D Scenes with Hierarchical 2D Inpainting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (NeurIPS 2024) .[33] Yandan Yang, Baoxiong Jia, Shujie Zhang, and Siyuan Huang. 2025. SceneWeaver: All-in-One 3D Scene Synthesis with an Extensible and Self-Reflective Agent. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .[34] Yandan Yang, Baoxiong Jia, Peiyuan Zhi, and Siyuan Huang. 2024. PhyScene: Physically Interactable 3D Scene Synthesis for Embodied AI. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .16262–16272. [35] Yue Yang, Fan-Yun Sun, Luca Weihs, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Winson Han, Jiajun Wu, Nick Haber, Ranjay Krishna, Lingjie Liu, Chris Callison-Burch, Mark Yatskar, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Christopher Clark. 2024. Holodeck: Language Guided Generation of 3D Embodied AI Environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 16227– 16237. [36] Zhaoda Ye, Yang Liu, and Yuxin Peng. 2024. MAAN: Memory-Augmented Auto-regressive Network for Text-driven 3D Indoor Scene Generation. IEEE Transac-tions on Multimedia (2024), 1–14. [37] Guangyao Zhai, Evin Pinar Ornek, Shun-Cheng Wu, Yan Di, Federico Tombari, Nassir Navab, and Benjamin Busam. 2023. CommonScenes: Generating Com-monsense 3D Indoor Scenes with Scene Graph Diffusion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .[38] Song-Hai Zhang, Shao-Kui Zhang, Wei-Yu Xie, Cheng-Yang Luo, Yong-Liang Yang, and Hongbo Fu. 2022. Fast 3D Indoor Scene Synthesis by Learning Spatial Relation Priors of Objects. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 28, 9 (2022), 3082–3092. [39] Yunzhi Zhang, Zizhang Li, Matt Zhou, Shangzhe Wu, and Jiajun Wu. 2025. The Scene Language: Representing Scenes with Programs, Words, and Embeddings. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 24625–24634. [40] Zaiwei Zhang, Zhenpei Yang, Chongyang Ma, Linjie Luo, Alexander Huth, Eti-enne Vouga, and Qixing Huang. 2020. Deep Generative Modeling for Scene Synthesis via Hybrid Representations. ACM Transactions on Graphics 39, 3 (2020), 17:1–17:21. [41] Xiaoming Zhu, Xu Huang, Qinghongbing Xie, Zhi Deng, Junsheng Yu, Yirui Guan, Zhongyuan Liu, Lin Zhu, Qijun Zhao, Ligang Liu, and Long Zeng. 2025. Imaginarium: Vision-guided High-Quality 3D Scene Layout Generation. ACM Transactions on Graphics 44, 6 (2025), 1–24.