Title: OccSim: Multi-kilometer Simulation with Long-horizon Occupancy World Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28887v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:07:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# OccSim: Multi-kilometer Simulation with Long-horizon Occupancy World Models 

Tianran Liu ⋆ , Shengwen Zhao , Mozhgan Pourkeshavarz , Weican Li , Nicholas Rhinehart †

Learning, Embodied Autonomy, and Forecasting (LEAF) Lab, University of Toronto Data-driven autonomous driving simulation has long been constrained by its heavy reliance on pre-recorded driving logs or spatial priors, such as HD maps. This fundamental dependency severely limits scalability, restricting open-ended generation capabilities to the finite scale of existing collected datasets. To break this bottleneck, we present OccSim, the first occupancy world model-driven 3D simulator .OccSim obviates the requirement for continuous logs or HD maps; conditioned only on a single initial frame and a sequence of future ego-actions , it can stably generate over 3,000 continuous frames, enabling the continuous construction of large-scale 3D occupancy maps spanning over 4 kilometers for simulation. This represents an >80 × improvement in stable generation length over previous state-of-the-art occupancy world models. OccSim is powered by two modules: W-DiT based static occupancy world model and the Layout Generator. W-DiT handles the ultra-long-horizon generation of static environments by explicitly introducing known rigid transformations in architecture design, while the Layout Generator populates the dynamic foreground with reactive agents based on the synthesized road topology. With these designs, OccSim can synthesize massive, diverse simulation streams. Extensive experiments demonstrate its downstream utility: data collected directly from OccSim can pre-train 4D semantic occupancy forecasting models to achieve up to 67% zero-shot performance on unseen data, outperforming previous asset-based simulator by 11%. When scaling the OccSim dataset to 5×

the size, the zero-shot performance increases to about 74%, while the improvement over asset-based simulators expands to 22.1%. 

Project Website: https://orbis36.github.io/OccSim/ 

# 1 Introduction 

Closed-loop evaluation is indispensable for the advancement of Level 4 autonomous driving systems [ 3, 6, 7 ]. Although open-loop replay of recorded data provides authentic data streams, it inherently lacks reactive responses to ego behaviors. In contrast, geometry-based simulators (e.g., CARLA[ 8]), despite supporting interactivity, suffer from a significant sim-to-real gap regarding sensor realism and content diversity [ 40 , 41 ]. This creates a fundamental trade-off: current approaches are often forced to compromise between realism, diversity, and interactivity. Although emerging data-driven simulations [ 36 , 45 ] promise to overcome this dilemma, existing methods exhibit notable deficiencies when deployed as reliable simulators. Specifically, we argue that a comprehensive and scalable data-driven simulator must satisfy the following desiderata: 1. Sensor realism & semantic richness : The simulator should not only approximate the distribution of real-world sensor data (high-fidelity sensor realism) but also inherently generate dense semantic labels, eliminating the reliance on manual annotation. 2. Reactive & diverse agents : Simulator should provide an API or direct learn non-ego vehicles (agents) interactive behaviors from data, reflecting human-like distributions rather than following heuristic rules or simple trajectory playback. 3. 3D-Consistent World Dynamics :The simulator should maintain global spatial persistence, overcoming the “memoryless visual hallucination” prevalent in standard generative models. During long-horizon closed-loop driving, static elements (e.g., road  

> ∗: Contact: tianran.liu@mail.utoronto.ca. †: Project Manager.

1 

> arXiv:2603.28887v1 [cs.CV] 30 Mar 2026 Figure 1 Comparison of OccSim and workflow. We overcome all of the mentioned drawback of previous method, with only 1 single frame and future actions, the W-DiT we proposed is able to build a multi-kilometer consistent occupancy map for autonomous driving simulation. The agent initial poses are generated via the layout generator and then forward-simulated. OccSim is compatible with multi-agent forward simulation methods as plug-and-play modules; in our experiments, we use an IDM variant [16].

topology, buildings) must preserve strict spatiotemporal consistency. For instance, when the ego-vehicle completes a loop and revisits a previously observed location, the static environment must remain structurally identical. 4. Log-independent Simulation : The simulator’s operation should not be overly-constrained by pre-recorded driving logs. Ideally, it possesses the capability for open-ended generation in novel, unseen scenarios in order to overcome the scale limitations of collected data. In this paper, we aim to address the overarching question: “How can we construct a data-driven generative simulator that efficiently satisfies these desiderata?” To this end, we present OccSim . To the best of our knowledge, OccSim is the first autonomous driving simulator driven by an occupancy world model. As illustrated in Figure 1, OccSim establishes a new paradigm: it uniquely satisfies all the aforementioned desiderata by conditioning solely on a single static frame and future ego-actions, while being trained entirely on publicly-available data. Specifically, we adopt a decoupling strategy for static and dynamic voxels. We model the simulation process as two synergistic generative tasks: the multi-kilometer rollout from world model to consist large-scale static scenes and the conditional generation of dynamic traffic flow. For static-world generation, the core difficulty is to ensure the stable high-quality output of the world model over ultra-long horizons. Prior work lacks this stability — given future actions, several SOTA occupancy world models[ 19 , 28 ] can only stably generate fewer than 50 frames (shown later in Fig. 5). Although this horizon is sufficient for vehicle control decisions, when the problem extends to larger-scale map construction (e.g., multiple city blocks, ≥ 2km 2) , 20–50 frames often cover a range of only about 60-150m (given 2Hz sampling rate with around 3 meters moving of ego vehicle per frame), which is far from real street size. For the task of dynamic generation, the model needs to add reasonable agents within the given range of static occupancy and simulate realistic motion through the static map. We attribute the short horizon rollout of occupancy world model to the network architecture design of current stochastic 4D occupancy world models, where almost all works directly borrow typical architectures from the video generation field: stacking multiple 3D occupancy latents in the temporal dimension and then aggregating features via DiTs in both temporal and spatial dimensions [ 11 , 23 ]. This paradigm neglects the inherent 2geometric rigidity and SE(3) equivariance of 3D space, forcing the network to implicitly learn complex camera motions: that is, most areas in space can be obtained through explicit rigid rotation matrices. This characteristic easily leads to model collapse during the auto-regressive based rollout process, where errors accumulate progressively. Based on this observation, we propose “W-DiT”, the first world model capable of diverse, at least 3k-step rollouts of static maps under complex trajectories (tested with over 3,000 frames generated, >80 × improvement in stable rollout length), which we have used to generate static scenes of over 4km in length. The core mechanism of W-DiT is a pipeline designed for effective conditioning on the previous frame: W-DiT explicitly utilizes 3D geometric priors through a unique Mask-injected Conditioning mechanism and an SNR-weighted occupancy perception loss. Extensive experiments prove that W-DiT is the first model capable of achieving 3k-step horizon static map rollout, while maintaining extremely high scene diversity. After obtaining single-frame outputs, we design a keyframe-based map fusion method and a graph-search-based lane topology extraction scheme, which allows us to obtain large-scale static road maps for agents to drive on. After acquiring the large-scale static road network, how to populate interactive agents without relying on historical logs? We discard rule-based heuristic algorithms and propose a layout generator based on Latent Flow Matching. The layout generator produces road structure-conditioned initial conditions of traffic. The inference logic of OccSim is shown in figure 1: first, generate a large-scale static road network at once, then randomly specify the ego vehicle’s position, and finally complete the population and control of all agents. In summary, our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1. We propose a new pipeline for data-driven occupancy-based simulation: it consists of an occupancy world model responsible for large-scale static scene generation, a layout generation model controlling the initial position and a IDM-based agents control engine. The pipeline also compatible with any current trajectory forecasting algorithms to provide even more realistic agent behavior control. 2. To solve the ultra-long rollout problem of the occupancy world model for road network construction, we propose W-DiT and corresponding optimization schemes. Our W-DiT based backbone can achieve a stable rollout length over 80 × longer than that of previous models using the same amount of training data. Furthermore, we provide a set of keyframe-based frame-to-map fusion schemes to obtain large-scale road networks. To our best knowledge, W-DiT is currently the first model capable of rolling out over 3,000 frames static occupancy and forming complex road topologies without relying on HD maps in any form as condition. 3. Unlike previous rule-based agent addition, our agent layout generation module can learn potential agent positions and states directly from semantic occupancy, allowing our model to provide more realistic initial traffic flows. 4. Combining all modules mentioned, extensive experiments confirm that with the data collected from OccSim, we can directly train existing semantic occupancy forecasting models and achieve up to 67% zero-shot performance in terms of average IoU/mIoU, which 11% higher than previous asset-based method. When scaling the collected OccSim dataset to 5 × the size, the zero-shot performance further increases to up to 74%, while the improvement over asset-based simulators expands to 22%. 

# 2 Related Work 

## 2.1 Long horizon RGB world models 

Driven by the abundance of data resources, numerous efforts to construct world models for autonomous driving have utilized RGB signals as their primary input to achieve robust long-horizon rollouts. For instance, GAIA-1 [14 ] employs a multi-modal transformer architecture with language and action conditioning to autoregressively generate minute-long video clips. GAIA-2 [ 27 ] extended this capability to multi-view RGB generation by transitioning the underlying backbone from a deterministic model to flow matching. Furthermore, Cosmos-Drive-Dreams [ 25 ] finetuning the Cosmos [ 1 ] foundation model to enhance the roll out of autonomous driving scene generation. In the indoor navigation task, Ego2Memory [ 42 ] explicitly uses VLM to map 2D features with Frontier Map for long-term persistent rollout. 3By introducing a two-stage training and fine-tuning pipeline alongside better utilization of dynamic priors, Vista [ 10 ] significantly improves the resolution and realism of generated videos, as evidenced by FID and FVD metrics. Subsequently, DrivingWorld [ 15 ] adopted a purely auto-regressive (AR) based approach. More recently, Epona [ 41 ] provided the first open-source implementation for long video rollouts, utilizing an AR diffusion method. 

## 2.2 Occupancy World Models in Autonomous Driving 

While RGB images offer rich semantic features, accurately capturing and predicting the complex 3D geometry and physical depth of dynamic environments remains a significant challenge. Consequently, there is a growing trend towards developing world models based on 3D occupancy representations, which are typically derived from voxelized and densified LiDAR data. Earlier works such as OccWorld [ 44 ] and Occllama [ 34 ] addressed this by combining discrete encoding techniques (e.g., VQ-VAE [ 31 ]) with deterministic auto-regressive (AR) transformer architectures, with Occllama further incorporating Large Language Models (LLMs) to enhance scene comprehension. Currently, generative modeling approaches have gained significant traction. For instance, DOME [ 11 ] utilizes a continuous VAE alongside a high-performance diffusion model, enabling fine-grained controllability. Recent advancements have further extended these capabilities: COME [ 28 ] introduces a post-trained ControlNet [ 43 ] approach, DynamicCity [ 2 ] leverages hex-plane decomposition, and OccFM [ 20 ] employs a Flow Matching-based multi-scale DiT [ 24 ] architecture. Expanding the scope, UniScene [ 18 ] explores a conditional pipeline that uses BEV layouts to generate comprehensive multi-sensor data, ranging from RGB images to LiDAR point clouds. 

## 2.3 Data driven simulation with generative models 

High-fidelity simulation is crucial for bridging the sim-to-real gap in autonomous driving, yet conventional physics-based simulators like CARLA [ 8] often struggle with domain discrepancies. Recent research has shifted towards data-driven approaches to leverage large-scale real-world datasets. Nocturne [ 32 ] facilitates high-efficiency simulation by replaying trajectories from the Waymo dataset. Building upon this, SLEDGE [ 5] and Scenario Dreamer[ 26 ] extends simulation to synthesized scenarios by generatively modeling road layouts and vehicle agents. In parallel, efforts have been made to generate more realistic sensory observations. ReSim [37 ] and DriveArena [ 38 ] utilize video generation techniques and HD maps to render high-resolution RGB observations for closed-loop policy evaluation. The raising of 3D Gaussian Splatting rendering in unbounded scene [ 4, 35 , 45 ] allow us reconstruct static backgrounds more realistic. While, the SemCity[ 17 ] and InifiCube[ 21 ] follow the out-painting solution introduced by Repainting[ 22 ] while combine it with tri-plane decomposition diffusion. Most recently, X-scene [39 ] advances the field by proposing an external diffusion module that generates BEV layouts from natural language prompts, thus mitigating dependency on recorded driving logs. 

# 3 Long-horizon static Occupancy World Models 

In this part, we introduce the W-DiT architecture and its corresponding optimization methods in Section 3.1, which form the foundation of our infinite-horizon static scene generation. In Section 3.2, we briefly describe how to merge single-frame static scenes generated by W-DiT and infinitely extend them into closed-loop city-scale environments. Furthermore, in Section 3.3, we will demonstrate how to learn the possible distribution of agents layout from data and incorporate them into the scene to interact with test ego vehicle. 

## 3.1 Long-horizon stable generation with W-DiT 

A fundamental distinction between occupancy sequences and RGB sequences is that perspective shifts of occupancy sequences can be represented with rigid transformations. Despite this advantage, most existing occupancy world models naïvely inherit the 2+1D information aggregation approach from video generation. We found that a geometry-aware alternative yields substantial improvements in long-term stability, perspective controllability, and spatial consistency. 4Figure 2 Illustration of structure to generate road map of t + 1 from condition at timestep t. Here, t represents the sequence frame index, and τ denotes the probability flow timestep. Different from classic temporal concatenation in the input, the core insight of this paradigm design is to transform temporal generation into scene completion at a single time point. This token-wise scale and shift condition injection method allow us can precisely control spatial rigid transformation during long-horizon generation. I(−) stand for rasterization process of given future trajectory Jt+nt+1 . The latent representations zt

and zt+1 (∈ RH×W ×Cz ) at bottom right corner are visualized as decoded BEV occupancy maps for intuitive illustration. 

Formally, using an occupancy VAE [ 20 ] (consisting of spatial compressor E and decoder D), we can map the occupancy frames Ot, Ot+1 to their respective latent representations zt, zt+1 ∈ RH×W ×Cz , where t denotes time index. Our aim is to model the joint predictive distribution over an extended future horizon: given an initial latent state z0 and a sequence of future ego-trajectories J0: K+σ , our goal is to auto-regressively estimate: 

P (z1: K |z0, J 0: K+σ ) = 

> K

Y

> i=1

Pθ (zi|zi−1, J i−1: i+σ−1), (1) where K is the overall forecast horizon and K + σ stand for the length of trajectory. When K ≥ 10 3, standard autoregressive formulations inevitably suffer from severe compounding errors, leading to structural drift and spatial inconsistency over time. To enforce ultra-long-term stability and fidelity, we propose the W-DiT (Warp-DiT) block (Figure 2). Unlike conventional RGB-based world models, which require the network to implicitly hallucinate perspective changes, the core design of W-DiT lies in explicitly utilizing a sequence of deterministic rigid transformation matrices—derived from the trajectory J—to warp the spatial latent representations, thereby bounding geometric accumulation error. Specifically, to have the rigid transformation matrices, we assume a planar motion on the XY -plane, we constrain the vertical velocity and roll/pitch rotations to zero. Therefore, we can define Tt+1  

> t

= exp( bξt∆t), where exp( ·)

denotes the matrix exponential, ξt = M(at) is the twist vector corresponding to at = [ vx,t , v y,t , ω t]⊤, the hat operator b· converts the twist ξt = [ vx,t , v y,t , 0, 0, 0, ω t]⊤ into its matrix form bξt = [[ ω]×, v; 0] ∈ R4×4,with the planar velocity vector v = [ vx,t , v y,t , 0] ⊤ and yaw rate vector ω = [0 , 0, ω t]⊤. Here, [·]× denotes the skew-symmetric matrix operator. Subsequently, by applying the rigid transformation Tt+1  

> t

, we forward-warp zt to the viewpoint at t + 1 to obtain the warped latent ˆzt+1 . Due to the ego-vehicle’s motion, certain spatial regions in this warped latent inevitably 5fall outside the sensor’s field of view or become occluded. To explicitly account for this, we can deterministically compute a binary visibility mask Mvis ∈ { 0, 1}H×W derived purely from the known geometry, where observable regions are set to 1 and unobservable ones to 0. However, since the physical displacement between adjacent frames is relatively small (e.g., 3 to 4 meters given ∆t = 0 .5s ), relying solely on Mvis is insufficient and encourages the model to degenerate into a trivial shortcut of directly copying the inputs, which severely hinders robust representation learning. Therefore, following MAE [ 12 ], we introduce an additional random mask 

Mrand ∈ { 0, 1}H×W , whose elements are sampled from a Bernoulli distribution B(1 − p), with p being the given masking ratio. The final conditioned latent ˜zt+1 is then formulated as ˜zt+1 = ( Mvis ⊙ Mrand ) ⊙ ˆzt+1 , where ⊙

denotes the Hadamard product, and the spatial masks are broadcast across the channel dimension Cz .Next, instead of fusing the future action with τ directly [ 11 , 28 ], we rasterized these action to waypoints which align with time index t+1 . Specifically, we represent the sequence of future actions as a set of physical waypoints 

Pt = {pt+i ∈ R2}σi=1 projected onto the BEV plane. These waypoints are anchored in the ego coordinate system at time t + 1 , derived by cumulatively applying the previously defined rigid transformation matrices 

Tt+σt+1 . By sequentially connecting these waypoints, we construct a continuous geometric polyline that explicitly traces the intended path from the current ego position towards the future road surface and then rasterize it to lt+1 ∈ { 0, 1}H,W, 1. Here we use function I(−) to represent this projection and rasterization process. Considering the interpolation error caused by the warping operation, we use a U-Net to refine the feature formed by concatenation of lt+1 and ˜zt+1 , before injecting them to the backbone. Here, we use f ′ 

> t+1

∈ RB,N,C w

to represent token from condition at time t and trajectory, where N = H × W .After obtaining these features ˆft+1 aligned to time index t + 1 , we perform feature injection by applying token-wise scaling and shifting. Specifically, for global scale, shift, and gate regression, we still follow the same setting in original DiT, use timestep τ as input. Simultaneously, we employ a token-wise projection layer to regress the spatial control signal from ˆft+1 :

[γglobal , β global , α global ] = MLP time (τ ), [Γtoken , Btoken , Atoken ] = MLP cond ( ˆft+1 )

From the main stream side, we obtain zτt+1 via a linear interpolation with the sampled gaussian noise ϵ:

zτt+1 = (1 − τ )ϵ + τ z t+1 and use ft+1 ∈ RB×N ×Cw to represent the tokenized feature feeded to W-DiT block. For the i-th token in the sequence, the modulation parameters are obtained via: 

γ(i) = γglobal + Γtoken (i), β(i) = βglobal + B(i)

> token

, α(i) = αglobal + A(i)

> token

With these dual-conditioned designs, the forward pass of the Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) module in our W-DiT block is formulated as: f ′ 

> t+1

= ft+1 + α1 ⊙ MHSA  γ1 ⊙ LN (h) + β1

, where γ1 = [ γ(1) , γ (2) , . . . , γ (N )]⊤ ∈

RN ×Cw denotes the stacked sequence of token-wise scale parameters, with β1 and α1 defined analogously. We adopt the identical setting for (γ2, β2, α2) in subsequent MLP layer. Finally, after processing through all W-DiT blocks, the network outputs a prediction of the instantaneous velocity field at the probability flow timestep τ . Let vθ (zτt+1 , τ, c) denote our W-DiT network parameterized by θ, where c compactly represents all the conditions we mentioned. Following the recent success of flow models in achieving high-quality generation with fewer sampling steps [20 , 29 , 41 ], we also optimize W-DiT by adopting a velocity loss objective. However, original MSE loss in flow matching provides a theoretically sound objective, our empirical investigations reveal that optimizing solely with it in the continuous latent space severely impedes model convergence. This phenomenon is a notorious challenge in continuous VAE-based generative models, where the MSE objective often forces the network into a “mean trap”. To overcome this bottleneck, we propose a novel SNR-scaled Perception Loss. Our core insight is to leverage the inherently discrete and semantic nature of 3D occupancy. Rather than constraining the loss entirely within the continuous latent manifold, we explicitly project the denoised predictions back into the discrete occupancy space for direct supervision. Our overall objective function is: 

Ltotal (θ) = Eτ,ϵ,z t+1 ,c



∥vθ − (zt+1 − ϵ)∥22 + λτ 2 Mmask 

|Mmask | CE 



Ot+1 , D(zτt+1 + (1 − τ )vθ )

 

(2) 6Figure 3 Agent initialization within generated static maps. Each panel displays a 200x200 voxel crop centered on the (unrendered) ego-vehicle from Mglobal . The first two panels show distinct generated scenes, the third and fourth panels demonstrate the model’s multimodality: two different plausible layouts generated for the same revisited location. Orange vehicles (second panel) are stationary. 

where Mmask = Mvis ⊙ Mrand and λ were used to balance different components. In the second term, at flow timestep τ , we first recover the denoised latent representation ˆzt+1 = zτt+1 + (1 − τ )vθ (zτt+1 , τ, c) using the current velocity field presented by vθ without any sampling. Then we feed ˆzt+1 into the frozen VAE decoder 

D to reconstruct the occupancy logits ˆOt+1 = D(ˆ zt+1 ) for mask-region only Cross-Entropy (CE) loss between 

ˆOt+1 and Ot+1 .Crucially, we introduce a time-dependent scaling factor τ 2 to this perception loss, which we ablate in Sec. 4.3. This term guarantees that, when τ is large (indicating a low-noise regime closer to the target data), the weight exponentially increases. This encourages the network to refine fine-grained geometric boundaries and semantic details. 

## 3.2 Multi-kilometer road map fusion from single frames 

As detailed in Sec. 3.1, our W-DiT is capable of stably rolling out thousands of static map frames. While the stochastic nature of flow models effectively bypasses the data scarcity bottleneck of traditional HD maps, the generated outputs remain discrete, ego-centric local scenes. Furthermore, naive fusion strategies, such as temporal averaging, tend to aggressively over-smooth crucial high-frequency details during sequence aggregation, because of the temporal inconsistency in the forecasted frames. Our strategy consists of two components: key-frame based fusion and branch road detection: We first propose a two-pass keyframe-based fusion heuristic (detailed in Alg. 1 in Appendix 9). Given local occupancy predictions and their global poses, we first aggregate a minimally overlapping keyframe subset to establish a sharp foundational map Mglobal . Subsequently, after a gravity alignment step, the redundant non-keyframes are used to robustly inpaint spatial gaps via threshold-based voting and morphological cleaning. To enable unbounded map expansion, we systematically identify valid extensible frontiers within Mglobal .By applying morphological skeletonization to the road manifold, we extract a topological graph to isolate candidate branch points (Alg. 2 in Appendix 9). A Dual-Probing Filtering mechanism—comprising topological and 3D semantic probes—is then employed to reject collision-prone directions. By selecting two valid disjoint endpoints and connecting them via a collision-free spline, we prompt W-DiT to autoregressively synthesize the missing intermediate occupancy. This autoregressive bridging paradigm elegantly closes the loop, enabling the unbounded, procedural generation of diverse autonomous driving scenarios from a single prompt occupancy. 

## 3.3 Agent generation and control with static road map 

Having constructed the city-scale static map Mglobal (with explicit lane graphs extracted via Alg. 3), we next populate the environment with plausible initial agent states. Unlike log-replay methods, our procedurally generated topologies are generated, necessitating a generative approach for traffic layouts. Formally, our objective is to model the conditional probability distribution of the agent layout given 1 frame of static environment: P (A| zt), where A = {(xi, y i, s i)}Ni=1 denotes the set of vehicle centers (xi, y i) motion 7states si ∈ { dynamic , static } and zstatic is cropped from a previously fused large map given a random pose. To make this distribution tractable for our flow-based generative framework, we map the discrete set A into a continuous 2D spatial heatmap H, encoding static and dynamic vehicles as positive and negative standard Gaussian kernels, respectively. Then we train a compact Diffusion Transformer (DiT-S) to learn the continuous distribution P (H| zt). To prevent the DiT-S from overfitting and memorizing small-scale dataset layouts, we apply multiple spatial augmentations during training (detailed in Appendix) During inference, the sampled heatmap H is discretized via Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) to extract individual vehicle instances. Each vehicle is then projected onto the nearest lane to establish a kinematically feasible initial yaw. In figure 3, we visualize several samples after add the agents to their initial pose. Finally, we employ A* routing and the extended 2D Intelligent Driver Model (2D-IDM) [ 16 ] to roll out microscopic kinematic trajectories toward randomly selected junctions in Mglobal (Alg. 5 in Appendix 9). While we utilize classic heuristics to validate simulation feasibility, our initialized map topology and agent poses guarantee plug-and-play compatibility with any modern learning-based trajectory forecasting model. 

# 4 Experiment 

We organized our experiments to answer the following 3 questions: Q1. Static Realism & Stability : Can the proposed W-DiT structure generate highly realistic and spatiotemporally consistent static environments, especially over extended horizons? Q2. Generation Diversity : Does OccSim exhibit sufficient multimodality and diversity in long-horizon rollout? Q3. Dynamic Fidelity & Downstream Utility : Can OccSim be used to train temporal-based tasks like 4D semantic occupancy forecasting more effectively than data collected from CARLA? 

## 4.1 Metrics and datasets 

To answer Q1 , we assess its performance across two primary dimensions: the realism of the generated static environments and the dynamic fidelity of the traffic simulation. Following previous works [ 2, 39 ], we evaluate static realism via 2D/3D-FID, KID, and MMD (denoted by Dis below). To formalize realism, we define two evaluation settings to measure the performance of model under different context: 1. Conditional fidelity : Dis 



Pθ ( ˆOt|O 0, J ), P data (Ot|O 0, J )



. This evaluates the structural accuracy at each specific time index t ∈ { 1, . . . , K} (K equal to the length of GT sequence) under the strict constraint of the initial observation O0 and ego-trajectory J. 2. Unconditional realism : Dis 



Pθ ( ˆOt|O 0, J ), P data (O)



,where t depend on the rollout length K. Although the generation inherently relies on the initial observation O0

and trajectory J, long-horizon rollouts can reasonably diverge into various valid structures. Therefore, instead of comparing against the strictly paired future frame, we measure the distance between the conditionally generated samples at time t and the global marginal distribution of the entire ground truth training set O. This ensures long-term rollouts universally reside on the valid data manifold. In Q2 , we introduce the Vendi score [ 9 ] and Semantic IoU diverse score. Specifically, the Semantic IoU diverse score evaluates structural divergence in the decoded semantic space by calculating the complement of the average Intersection over Union across multiple stochastic rollouts generated from the same initial scene. Meanwhile, the Vendi score operates in the latent feature space—extracted via a pretrained encoder—to quantify the effective sample size of the generated distributions. These metrics reflect the model’s multimodality, where higher scores indicate a richer variety of plausible future layouts, demonstrating the simulator’s capability to model environmental uncertainty. To address Q3 , we evaluate the dynamic simulation performance through a zero-shot transfer setting. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to demonstrate the downstream utility of a data-driven simulator by evaluating its pre-training efficacy on the 4D semantic occupancy forecasting task. Specifically, we utilize continuous data streams collected directly from the ego-vehicle’s perspective within our generated simulation. Performance on this downstream task serves as a proxy, directly reflecting the simulator’s capability to faithfully emulate complex, real-world traffic dynamics. 8Regarding datasets, we utilize Occ3D-nuScenes [ 30 ] for all static generation realism comparisons to ensure fairness in training data volume. For the remaining experiments, we employ UniOcc-Waymo [ 33 ] or UniOcc-nuScenes due to their unified voxel categorization. Additional simulation metrics and training/implementation details are provided in Appendix 6.3. 

## 4.2 Main results comparisons 

We first evaluate the realism and stability of the generated static road maps. In Fig. 4, we compare our results with previous occupancy world models in terms of both conditional fidelity and unconditional realism. For a comprehensive analysis, our evaluations are conducted across two distinct VAE latent spaces (derived from UniScene [ 18 ] and OccFM [ 20 ]). As illustrated in the figure, our method (shown in red) demonstrates superior long-term stability and structural realism, significantly outperforming baseline models that suffer from rapid error accumulation. Furthermore, due to the limited number of ground truth (GT) samples (fewer than 1000 per timestep t), we specifically selected unbiased metrics—namely KID and MMD with two different kernels—to assess conditional fidelity. Here, 1000 frames rollout generated conditioned on straight trajectory after GT’s, with constant velocity.  

> Figure 4 Realism evaluation of generated 3D static occupancy. The left three columns report the conditional fidelity (MMD and KID) under a 30-frame constraint. The right two columns showcase the unconditional realism (KID and FID) over a 1000-frame long-horizon rollout. Our W-DiT-based method obtains the best long-horizon stability and conditional realism.

This performance gap observed in the 3D occupancy metrics becomes even more pronounced when evaluating realism on the 2D plane. As illustrated in Fig. 5, to increase the rigor of our evaluation, we selected three distinct trajectories to compare our method against the previous state-of-the-art model, COME (details regarding the specific trajectory shapes are provided in Fig. 8 of the Appendix). Notably, even when evaluated on the most challenging curved and closed-loop trajectories, our approach still outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method’s results on simpler straight-line trajectories. 9Figure 5 Long-horizon 2D realism under varying trajectories. FID and KID comparisons for 2D projections of the 3D generated occupancy. We evaluate three ego-actions: straight, closed-loop, and continuous turning. The dashed reference line indicates the “chaos” threshold characterizing scene collapse. In all scenarios, our model (red) remains strictly below this threshold, vastly outperforming the previous SOTA model(which exceed the “chaos” threshold in 35/40-th frame generated) and ensuring long-term structural integrity regardless of the driving action. 

Furthermore, to establish a lower-bound reference, we constructed a 1000-frame occupancy map collection to serve as a “chaos” baseline. This was achieved by randomly selecting structurally collapsed samples from the model’s output that lack coherent semantic information. Qualitatively, any metric score surpassing this baseline threshold indicates a completely unusable state. Visualizations of this chaotic baseline collection are available in Appendix 8.3. To evaluate the generation diversity over long-term rollouts, we analyze the Pairwise mIoU Diversity and Vendi Scores across first 100 timesteps, as illustrated in Fig. 6. Our proposed method consistently outperforms prior generative baselines. Notably, at early timesteps, our approach demonstrates a rapid increase in diversity, establishing a significant margin over both COME and DOME. As the autoregressive generation extends, our method maintains a high and stable level of diversity without performance degradation. In both OccFM and UniScenes latent spaces, our method achieves the highest Vendi Scores, indicating a richer variety of generated geometric and semantic structures.  

> Figure 6 Generation diversity comparison. Pairwise mIoU diversity and Vendi scores evaluated over 100 timesteps using 10 random seeds. Solid lines and shaded areas denote the mean and the 25th-75th percentiles, respectively. Our methods performed the best diversity in the rollout among all tested generative method.

To further validate the practical utility of our generated world, we evaluate OccSim on the downstream task of 4D semantic forecasting. For this experiment, we configure the model to unroll along a curved, closed-loop trajectory, expanding the generation horizon from 1,000 to 3,000 frames to construct a significantly larger map. Based on this extended map, we build the simulation environment utilizing the methodologies detailed in Sec. 3.2 and Sec. 3.3. As demonstrated in Tab. 1, even when relying on a relatively straightforward dynamics algorithm such as the 2D IDM to control agents, OccSim provides better training signals for simulating 10 Table 1 The performance of different semantic forecasting model trained with occupancy collected from UniOcc-Carla(Uni-C) or OccSim, test on UniOcc-NuScenes(Uni-N) validation set. mIOU measured over all background occupancy categories and car category for foreground. †: We collected the same amount of data on OccSim as that provided by UniOcc for Carla for fairness. ⋆: Use ×5 amount of data collected from OccSim to train downstream models. Stoch.: whether the model is stochastic. The gray-shaded rows represent the performance upper bound, as the models are trained and tested on the same domain without domain shift. 

Model Train Data mIoU IoU IoU veh Stoch. 1s 2s 3s 1s 2s 3s OccWorld[44] Uni-N 26.53 16.73 12.33 32.17 22.88 18.41 17.10 ✗

OccWorld Uni-C 11.79 8.35 6.75 18.31 14.09 12.03 6.58 ✗

OccWorld † OccSim 13.51 9.56 7.61 20.53 15.48 13.24 7.46 ✗

OccWorld ⋆ OccSim 19.54 12.31 9.08 23.87 16.92 13.47 12.41 ✗

OccFM[20] Uni-N 36.28 25.10 19.47 41.22 30.90 25.02 28.79 ✓

OccFM Uni-C 6.99 5.34 4.70 8.63 6.50 5.71 6.42 ✓

OccFM † OccSim 15.93 11.76 9.26 18.31 14.10 11.75 13.28 ✓

OccFM ⋆ OccSim 25.32 18.96 13.10 29.19 21.08 13.93 15.82 ✓

overall traffic flow and background dynamics than CARLA. Notably, models trained on data generated by OccSim achieve better performance compared to those trained on the CARLA simulator (Uni-C), showing an improvement of at least 14% relative in average mIoU across the two semantic forecasting models. When we collect 5x more data from UniOcc to train the downstream model, this gap further expands to 52% . In terms of 3s average IoU, our method reaches 67% and 72% of the upper-bound’s performance. 

## 4.3 Ablation study 

In Tab. 2, we conduct a detailed analysis of the perception loss, network architecture, and SNR weighting proposed in our W-DiT design: The success of W-DiT is inextricably linked to these three components. It is evident that without any one of them, achieving stable quality output at the 500-frame scale becomes challenging. Among these, the feature injection structure plays the most significant role. Without this design, the model’s output degrades rapidly.  

> Table 2 W-DiT design ablation: we use 3D unconditional realism FID score. When not using the “local-global” form of feature aggregation we propose, we directly concatenate the masked condition with the input. The latent here is encoded by AE from UniScenes.

Percep. Loss Dual-head injection SNR scaled 1st 5th 10th 30th 50th 100th 500th 

✗ ✗ ✗ 663.89 712.56 789.91 1023.51 1281.99 1587.21 1612.40 

✗ ✓ ✗ 637.52 708.91 924.11 992.72 1206.50 1387.55 1672.43 

✓ ✓ ✗ 676.98 652.91 711.66 782.25 801.67 852.30 901.57 

✓ ✓ ✓ 665.23 630.34 645.96 687.90 698.87 712.65 744.71 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present OccSim, the first occupancy world model-driven simulator capable of generating diverse and realistic rollouts spanning thousands of frames without any BEV layout or HD map as input. We demonstrate that a comprehensive simulator built upon such generated road topologies can replicate the spatiotemporal dynamics of driving scenarios with significantly higher fidelity than traditional simulators. As our framework is inherently compatible with complex learning-based policies, future work could study replacing IDM with other data-driven control strategies, alongside extending the simulator to support high-fidelity multi-modal generation. 11 Acknowledgments 

This research was enabled in part by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada ( alliancecan.ca ), the NVIDIA Academic Grant Program, and Google TPU Research Cloud (TRC). 12 Appendix 

In this appendix, we supplement the following materials to support the findings and conclusions drawn in the main body of this paper. 

6 Training and metric details 14 

6.1 Training configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 6.2 Augmentation in Layout generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 6.3 Additional metrics details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

7 Additional ablation experiments 15 

7.1 Inference speed and condition comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

8 Additional visualization 15 

8.1 Visualization of long-horizon rollouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 8.2 Visualization of trajectory shapes used in Fig. 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 8.3 Visualization of chaos baseline constructed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

9 Algorithm details 16 

9.1 Heuristic for Single frame fusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 9.2 Branch road detection and topology extraction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 9.3 Lane topology extraction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 9.4 2D-IDM based simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 

10 Potential limitation and Future work 20 

13 6 Training and metric details 

## 6.1 Training configuration 

The training of OccSim’s two components—W-DiT and the Layout Generator—was conducted separately as follows. For W-DiT, we trained for 200 epochs on 4 Blackwell RTX Pro 6000 GPUs with a batch size of 32. Training on the Nuscenes dataset took approximately 100 GPU hours. For the Layout Generator, we trained for 500 epochs on 8 A100 80G GPUs, taking approximately 160 GPU hours. All of the experiments used AdamW with cosine annealing, decaying the learning rate from 3.2e-5 to 3.2e-6. In Eq. 2, we set λ = 2 , with 20% possiblilty to drop condition during training for classifier free guidance [ 13 ]in sampling stage. When generating Mrand , we control the maximum of overall masked region Mmask between 10% to 50% of the full latent size. ϵ in Eq. 2 is sampled from sigmoid (N (0 , I )) .

## 6.2 Augmentation in Layout generator 

Theoretically, the distribution of valid vehicle behaviors given a specific map representation, denoted P (H| zt), is inherently highly multimodal, as various driving intentions can perfectly align with the same static environment. However, direct optimization on a finite training dataset D = {(z(i) 

> t

, H(i))}Ni=1 poses a severe risk of overfitting, as the number of samples is only 28K to train the DiT-S. In practice, for any specific scene z(i) 

> t

in the log, we only observe a single deterministic realization of the vehicles’ behavior H(i). Consequently, without proper regularization, model tend to memorize these exact map-action pairs, effectively collapsing the learned conditional distribution into a Dirac delta function, Pθ (H| z(i) 

> t

) ≈ δ(H − H (i)).To prevent the model from memorizing spurious correlations between specific voxel arrangements and deter-ministic position, we introduce the data augmentation in layout generator training. By applying paired spatial transformations T to both the condition and the target, i.e., (T (zt), T (H)) , we artificially expand the support of the empirical distribution. Specifically, we introduce a two-stage data augmentation pipeline comprising agent-level perturbations and global spatial transformations. First, to manage scene density and prevent the model from overfitting to overly crowded environments, we cap the maximum number of vehicles per frame at 10; if a frame contains N > 10 vehicles, we uniformly sample a subset of exactly 10 vehicles without replacement, ensuring each vehicle has an equal retention probability of 10 /N . For each retained vehicle, we project it onto a 2D spatial heatmap H ∈ R200 ×200 ×1 as a Gaussian distribution. Specifically, the Gaussian is centered at the vehicle’s spatial coordinates with a kernel radius of 3. To simulate positional uncertainty and enrich the local behavioral manifold, we independently perturb the center of each Gaussian, randomly shifting it within a local 5 × 5 neighborhood restricted to the drivable surface area. Following this localized perturbation, we apply rigid global transformations to the entire augmented scene (including both the occupancy map and the constructed heatmap H). We uniformly sample and apply discrete rotations R ∈ { 90 ◦, 180 ◦, 270 ◦} and axis-aligned reflections and axis-aligned reflections (flipping along the x-or y-axis). Crucially, identical spatial transformations are applied to the corresponding latent representations to maintain spatial alignment with H. While such reflections fundamentally invert the handedness of the traffic rules (effectively synthesizing valid left-hand traffic scenarios from right-hand data), this joint transformation ensures that all local topological constraints and relative vehicle dynamics remain physically coherent. This composite strategy effectively artificially expands the empirical distribution, forcing the network to learn robust, viewpoint-invariant geometric representations. 

## 6.3 Additional metrics details 

To evaluate the diversity of the generated stochastic rollouts, we employ two distinct metrics: Pairwise mIoU Diversity in the decoded semantic space, and the Vendi Score [9] in the latent feature space. For the decoded semantic space, we generate N independent sequences over T frames using different random seeds. At any given timestep t, we compute the mean Intersection over Union ( mIoU ) across all semantic categories for every unique pair of generated occupancy grids. The Pairwise mIoU Diversity at time t is then 14 defined as the complement of the average pairwise similarity: 

Dt = 1 − 1

|P| 

X

> (i,j )∈P

mIoU (i,j )

> t

where P = {(i, j ) : 1 ≤ i < j ≤ N } denotes the set of all unordered seed pairs. The rollout-level diversity is obtained by averaging Dt over time. To capture structural diversity in the latent space, we report the Vendi Score, which measures the effective sample size of the generated distributions. First, we extract frame-level features {xi}Ni=1 using pretrained encoders (i.e., the OccFM VAE encoder and the UniScenes AE encoder). We then compute a cosine similarity kernel matrix Q, where its elements are given by Qij = (1 + ˜ x⊤ 

> i

˜xj )/2, with ˜x being the ℓ2-normalized feature. The Vendi Score is calculated as the exponential of the von Neumann entropy of the normalized kernel matrix 

ˆQ = Q/tr (Q):

V = exp − X

> ℓ

λℓ log λℓ

!

where {λℓ} are the non-negative eigenvalues of ˆQ.Intuitively, the Vendi Score quantifies the effective number of distinct modes within a given set of generations. By evaluating the entropy of the similarity eigenspectrum, it properly penalizes highly correlated samples. A higher Vendi Score indicates that the generated occupancy features are widely distributed across the latent space, reflecting true structural and geometric diversity rather than minor variations of a single collapsed mode. 

# 7 Additional ablation experiments 

## 7.1 Inference speed and condition comparison 

In the previous section, we demonstrated a comparison between our method and prior approaches in terms of realism. However, it is worth noting that our method also achieves significant improvements in real-time performance compared to them. In Tab. 3, we compares the time and FLOPS required for our method to generate a single frame.  

> Table 3 Comparison of efficiency and computational cost among different methods. When evaluating the time taken by our method, we distribute the post-processing time evenly across each frame of the sequence generation. Each result was computed independently using an RTX4090. DOME and COME generate 6 frames together, ours is 1 single frame per step, for fair comparison, we keep measure the GFLOPS / inference time needed per single frame.

Method WM Input #Params Frames second GFLOPS frame 

DOME ✓ 4 frames sem. occ.&traj 444.07M 5.48 8891.98 COME ✓ 4 frames sem. occ.&traj 204.53M 2.33 41333.17 InfiniCubes ✕ 1 frames sem. occ. 831.75M 0.02 990927.28 OccSim (Ours) ✓ 1 frames sem. occ. & traj 181.24M 1.47 15570.18 

# 8 Additional visualization 

## 8.1 Visualization of long-horizon rollouts 

From Fig. 7, we can clearly observe that our proposed W-DiT significantly extends the duration of stable rollout. Even after 3000 frames (1500s, approximately 25 minutes), the generated occupancy remains stable. 

## 8.2 Visualization of trajectory shapes used in Fig. 5 

To systematically evaluate the robustness of our model in long-horizon generation across diverse driving behaviors, we configure three distinct spatial trajectory profiles: Loop, Straight, and Turn. As illustrated in 15 Figure 7 Qualitative comparison of two rollouts for two models: previous SOTA occupancy world model (first and third rows), and our model (second and fourth rows) at different horizons. Ours exhibits long-horizon stability under different trajectory input. 

Fig. 8, the trajectory generation process conditioned on is consist of the initial ground-truth (GT) trajectory (highlighted in blue, encompassing frames 1–40) and extended trajectory with 3 modes (red lines). 

## 8.3 Visualization of chaos baseline constructed 

As shown in Fig. 9, the constructed “chaos” baseline primarily comprises severely fragmented road segments, topologically disconnected layouts, and large-scale empty regions. Consequently, as we mentioned in Fig. 5, any model yielding FID/KID scores above this baseline threshold can be deemed completely incapable of synthesizing large-scale, valid road networks. 

# 9 Algorithm details 

## 9.1 Heuristic for Single frame fusion. 

After we obtained the raw forecast observation {O i}Ki from the W-DiT based world model, we than use the following algorithm 1 to fuse all frames to Mglobal .The pipeline consists of four primary phases. First, to manage computational overhead and redundancy, we subsample the generated sequences into keyframes based on a spatial distance threshold, projecting them onto a unified SE(2) bird’s-eye-view (BEV) plane. Second, during the initial fusion pass, we introduce a deterministic column sinking operation. This forces all predicted ground-level voxels to align with the absolute zero-elevation plane ( z = 0 ), effectively rectifying pitch and roll artifacts or elevation drifts accumulated over long-horizon rollouts. Third, to address occlusions and local generation artifacts, we leverage the temporal redundancy of non-keyframes; by applying a spatial majority voting mechanism, we robustly inpaint the remaining gaps on the 

z = 0 plane. Finally, a morphological refinement stage—comprising binary closing and connected-component 16 Figure 8 Visualization of trajectory shapes (Loop, Straight, and Turn) evaluated in Fig. 5. The green star indicates the starting point. The blue solid line denotes the initial ground-truth (GT) trajectory snippet (frames 1–40) used as the condition prompt, while the red dashed line represents the extended trajectory explicitly designed to guide the long-horizon generation. For visual clarity the displayed trajectories are truncated at 500 frames, whereas our actual synthesis spans up to 3000 frames. 

area filtering—is applied to enforce spatial continuity on sidewalks and systematically remove isolated noise clusters (e.g., artifacts smaller than 2m2). This pipeline ensures a connected and smooth road topology, which is strictly required for downstream 2D multi-agent simulations. 

## 9.2 Branch road detection and topology extraction. 

Then, to bridge the gap between discrete occupancy grids Mglobal and vectorized road networks required for downstream multi-agent simulation, we propose a robust topology extraction and graph refinement algorithm. We first extract the 2D drivable surface mask, apply connected-component filtering, and perform strict single-pixel skeletonization to initialize the graph structure. To mitigate rasterization artifacts, we systematically eliminate spurious triangular loops by removing the longest edges within 3-cliques. Subsequently, a rigorous graph cleaning protocol is executed: we iteratively prune short, noisy spurs and introduce a node contraction mechanism to merge spatially dense junction clusters into unified super-nodes, accurately reflecting complex real-world intersections. Finally, to precisely isolate valid map ingress and egress points, we design a novel Dual-Probe filtering mechanism. A topology probe identifies and discards artificial endpoints caused by internal fragmentation, while a semantic probe leverages the 3D elevation profile of the occupancy map to detect physical occlusions or obstacles along the projected path. Ultimately, this pipeline translates the generated voxel map into a high-fidelity, deadlock-free topological graph, providing a reliable foundation for downstream closed-loop planning and control. 

## 9.3 Lane topology extraction. 

After we have G, Vvalid , we use the retained graph information to create lane graphs. As shown in Alg. 3, based on the extracted skeleton, i.e., E ∈ G , we introduce a two-phase lane topology extraction algorithm (Algorithm 3). In the first phase, we convert the raw skeletal segments into kinematically smooth reference centerlines using 3rd-degree B-Spline interpolation with a fixed spatial resolution ∆sstep . To reconstruct multi-lane structures, we generate explicit parallel lanes via orthogonal offsetting along the normal vectors of the reference trajectories. To guarantee physical feasibility, we strictly enforce a topological boundary constraint: the interior of any newly generated lane must be fully bounded by the drivable surface mask B.In the second phase, we address the geometric overlaps that inevitably occur at complex intersections where multiple segments converge. We formulate this as a spatial intersection resolution problem. For each candidate lane, we identify conflict points that fall within a minimal distance threshold ϵ of any other independent lane. We then sever the trajectories at these overlapping junctions and exclusively retain the longest continuous sub-trajectory. Finally, a secondary B-Spline interpolation is applied to eliminate any geometric artifacts or 17 Figure 9 Visualization of frames from the “chaos” baseline. We randomly visualize 20 frames from the 1000 samples pool. The semantic categories represented by colors here are consistent with those in Fig. 3. 

18 Algorithm 1 Two-pass Keyframe-based Occupancy Fusion 

Require: Local predictions { ˆOt}Tt=1 , Ego-poses {Tt}Tt=1 , max step dmax , vote threshold τ , number of semantic categories C.

Ensure: Fused global occupancy map Mglobal ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , C }X×Y ×Z . 

> 1:

// Phase 1: SE(2) Projection & Keyframe Selection  

> 2:

Tt(x, y ) ← Proj SE(2) (Tt), ∀t ∈ { 1 . . . T } ▷ Align to BEV plane  

> 3:

K ← { 1}, plast ← T1(x, y ) 

> 4:

for t = 2 to T do  

> 5:

if ∥Tt(x, y ) − plast ∥2 > d max then  

> 6:

K ← K ∪ { t}, plast ← Tt(x, y ) 

> 7:

// Phase 2: Pass 1 - Keyframe Sinking & Fusion  

> 8:

Initialize Mglobal (v) ← ∅, ∀v ∈ ZX×Y ×Z ▷ ∅ denotes unassigned.  

> 9:

for k ∈ K do  

> 10:

O′ 

> k

← W ( ˆOk, Tk) ▷ Spatial warping to global coordination  

> 11:

▷ Assign key-frame voxels from local map to global map.  

> 12:

Mglobal (v) ← O ′

> k

(v), ∀v s.t. Mglobal (v) = ∅ 

> 13:

∆z(x, y ) ← min {z | M global (x, y, z ) ∈ C ground } 

> 14:

Mglobal (x, y, z ) ← M global (x, y, z + ∆ z) ▷ Column sinking to lowest ground  

> 15:

Mglobal (v) ← Mode (N3×3(v)) for v where Mglobal (v) = ∅, z = 0  

> 16:

// Phase 3: Pass 2 - Non-Keyframe Voting Inpainting  

> 17:

Initialize vote tensor V ∈ NX×Y ×Z×C ← 0 

> 18:

for t / ∈ K do  

> 19:

O′ 

> t

← W ( ˆOt, Tt) 

> 20:

V(v, c ) ← V (v, c ) + I[O′

> t

(v) = c], ∀v s.t. Mglobal (v) = ∅ 

> 21:

Mglobal (v) ← arg max c V(v, c ) if max c V(v, c ) ≥ τ 

> 22:

// Phase 4: Morphological Refinement  

> 23:

Mglobal ← CloseOp (Mglobal , c sidewalk ) ▷ Binary closing on sidewalk  

> 24:

Mglobal ← FilterAreaOp (Mglobal , c road , A < 2m2) ▷ Remove isolated noise  

> 25:

return Mglobal 

non-differentiable kinks introduced by the splitting process. This rigorous pipeline yields a highly precise, non-overlapping lane network, providing a kinematically reliable foundation for multi-agent closed-loop simulation. 

## 9.4 2D-IDM based simulation. 

With all geometric information obtained, we introduce a 2D-IDM based simulation in Alg. 5. The algorithm is structurally divided into two phases: global pre-computation (Phase 1) and dynamic step-by-step execution (Phase 2). Phase 1 employs a proactive spatial pre-computation strategy. Rather than solely initializing traffic around the starting ego-pose ( Tego  

> 0

), the engine seamlessly injects background agents at forward and backward anchor poses ( Tfwd , Tbwd ) extending up to a predefined horizon dpre . The unified SpawnAgents procedure handles this layout generation, simultaneously sampling valid endpoints, predicting spatial coordinates, and assigning initial shortest paths via A* routing. In the simulation part, algorithm 5 Line 20 defines the spatial identification of candidate leading vehicles ( Ca). Instead of relying on heuristic bounding box checks, an agent a filters surrounding vehicles using a normalized vector dot product, 

 (pa′ −pa)·ha  

> ∥pa′−pa∥2

> 0.5



, to ensure the target is strictly within a 60 ◦ forward field-of-view cone. This is coupled with a trajectory distance constraint ( Dist (pa′ , π traj ) < d lat ) to confirm the target is actively blocking the planned route. Furthermore, algorithm 5 Line 23 explicitly shows the lane-changing logic. An agent initiates a Bezier-smoothed 19 Algorithm 2 Branch point detection / topology extraction 

Require: Fused global map Mglobal ∈ { 0, . . . , C }X×Y ×Z , lane width wlane , pruning threshold τprune . Vvalid ← ∅

for valid branch node set in the graph. 

Ensure: Vectorized road graph G = ( V, E ), valid endpoints Pvalid . 

> 1:

// Phase 1: Binary Masking & Skeletonization  

> 2:

B(x, y ) ← I[Mglobal (x, y, 0) = croad ], ∀(x, y ) ∈ Z2 

> 3:

S ← Skeletonize (B) 

> 4:

S(x + 1 , y + 1) ← 0, ∀(x, y ) s.t. P1

> i=0

P1 

> j=0

S(x + i, y + j) = 4  

> 5:

// Phase 2: Graph Initialization & Artifact Removal  

> 6:

V ← { v ∈ Z2 | S (v) = 1 } 

> 7:

E ← { (u, v) | u, v ∈ V, ∥u − v∥∞ = 1 }, with weight w(u, v) = ∥u − v∥2 

> 8:

Initialize graph G ← (V, E ) 

> 9:

for each 3-clique (triangle) K3 ∈ G do  

> 10:

emax ← arg max e∈K3 w(e) 

> 11:

E ← E \ { emax } ▷ Break loops to expose leaf nodes  

> 12:

// Phase 3: Iterative Spur Pruning & Junction Contraction  

> 13:

repeat  

> 14:

Vleaf ← { v ∈ V | deg (v) = 1 } 

> 15:

Find branch path Pl→j from l ∈ V leaf to nearest junction j (deg (j) > 2) 

> 16:

if P 

> e∈P

w(e) < τ prune then  

> 17:

V ← V \ (Pl→j \ { j}) ▷ Remove short spurs  

> 18:

until no spurs are removed  

> 19:

Vjunc ← { v ∈ V | deg (v) > 2} 

> 20:

for u, v ∈ V junc s.t. ∥u − v∥2 < 2 · wlane do  

> 21:

G ← ContractNodes (G, u, v) ▷ Merge clustered junctions  

> 22:

// Phase 4: Dual-Probe Endpoint Filtering  

> 23:

Oobstacle ← (Mglobal (x, y, z ≥ 1) /∈ { croad , c sidewalk , ∅}) ▷ Get 3D obstacle occ above ground layer  

> 24:

Vend ← { v ∈ V | deg (v) = 1 } 

> 25:

for v ∈ V end do  

> 26:

Let ⃗ d be the outward normalized direction vector from parent junction to v. 

> 27:

Topology Probe : ptopo ← v + (1 .5 · wlane )⃗d 

> 28:

Semantic Probe : Generate 15 m × 3.6m bounding box Bsem along ⃗ d from v. 

> 29:

if B(ptopo ) == 0 and P 

> p∈Bsem

I[O3D (p)] < τ obs then  

> 30:

Vvalid ← V valid ∪ { v} ▷ Endpoint is neither internal nor blocked  

> 31:

return G, Vvalid 

lane transition and A* re-routing only when the longitudinal distance falls below a critical threshold ( s < d lc )under two specific risks: either the ego agent is approaching a slower leader ( ∆v > 0), or it encounters a wrong-way/head-on vehicle. The latter scenario is elegantly captured by the negative dot product of their respective heading unit vectors ( ha · halead < −0.5). Finally, the kinematic states are updated via IDM, and the dynamic 3D assets are sequentially rendered onto the cropped static background using a spatial overwrite operator ( ⊛) to handle semantic Z-buffering (Step 2.3), ultimately producing a seamless sequence of dynamic local environments. 

# 10 Potential limitation and Future work 

Although OccSim provide the first implementation of using occupancy world model in simulation, we still observe the following limitation in design and evaluation period of OccSim: 

• Heuristic based fusion and lane graph extraction : Although the robustness of our multi-frame fu-sion/lane graph extraction algorithm has been qualitatively demonstrated in numerous practical applica-20 Algorithm 3 Lane Topology Extraction 

Require: Extracted segments S from G, drivable mask B, lane width wlane , distance threshold ϵ, resampling step ∆sstep .

Ensure: Vectorized explicit lanes Lfinal . 

> 1:

// Phase 1: B-Spline Smoothing & Parallel Offsetting  

> 2:

Lcand ← ∅ 

> 3:

for each S ∈ S s.t. |S| ≥ 10 do  

> 4:

Pc ← BSpline (Spath , deg = 3 , ∆sstep ) 

> 5:

N ← NormalVectors (Pc), n ← ⌊ Swidth /w lane ⌋ − 1 

> 6:

O ←   i − n−12

 wlane i ∈ { 0, . . . , n − 1} 

> 7:

for o ∈ O do  

> 8:

Pl ← Pc + o · N ▷ Generate parallel lane curves  

> 9:

if P◦ 

> l

⊂ B then ▷ P◦ 

> l

denotes the interior of the trajectory  

> 10:

Lcand ← L cand ∪ { Pl} 

> 11:

// Phase 2: Spatial Intersection Resolution & Resmoothing  

> 12:

for each L ∈ L cand do  

> 13:

CL ← { p ∈ L | ∃ L′ ∈ L cand \ { L}, dist (p, L ′) < ϵ } ▷ Identify cross-lane overlaps  

> 14:

L ← arg max Lsub ⊆(L\C L) |Lsub | ▷ Retain the longest continuous sub-trajectory  

> 15:

L ← BSpline (L, deg = 3 , ∆sstep ) ▷ Smooth artifacts caused by splitting  

> 16:

Lfinal ← { L ∈ L cand | | L| ≥ 5} ▷ Remove all lanes short than 5 pixels  

> 17:

return Lfinal 

tions, given the occasional instability in the quality of the raw occupancy frames output by the model, we still seek an end-to-end fusion approach rather than frame-by-frame fusion. 

• Reliance on the rotation in-variance of the latent space : As mentioned in the previous discussion, one of the assumptions underlying W-DiT is the rotational invariance of the latent space. Although our experiments demonstrate that the minor errors introduced by the Warp+interpolation operation do not cause the model to collapse after U-Net correction, we still look forward to future work that can perform lossless rotational operations directly in the occupancy space without relying on the latent. 

• Limited training data : Compared to image data, semantic occupancy data requires manual semantic annotation, which limits the total amount of available training data to fewer than 100,000 frames. This volume is significantly smaller than the amount of available RGB video data, and it also restricts our ability to explore the upper limits of the model’s performance. 

Algorithm 4 Spatially-conditioned agent generation and routing initialization 

Require: Query anchor pose T ∈ SE (2) with spatial coordinate pT, boolean flag bego indicating whether to explicitly initialize the ego vehicle at T, mean/standard of initial velocity μv , σ v , Mglobal as global map, 

Vvalid from Alg. 2, Agents asset pool X . 

> 1:

Crop local occupancy OT from Mglobal by pose T. 

> 2:

Anew ← LayoutGenerator (OT) ∪  {pT} if bego else ∅ 

> 3:

for each agent a ∈ A new parameterized by pose pa do  

> 4:

Initialize velocity va ← vdes ∼ N (μv , σ v ) 

> 5:

ptarget ∼ Uniform (Vvalid ) ▷ Random valid endpoint  

> 6:

§a ∼ Uniform (X ) ▷ Random agent asset  

> 7:

πtraj ← A* (Lfinal , pa, ptarget ) ▷ Shortest valid path  

> 8:

ha ← Tangent (πtraj , pa) ▷ Generate initial headings from trajectory  

> 9:

a ← (pa, ha, v a, π traj , §a) ▷ Assign initial states to agent  

> 10:

return Anew 

21 Algorithm 5 A* routing + 2D-IDM based control engine pseudo codes 

Require: A pool of global maps M generated, IDM parameters, rolling horizon threshold droll , simulation horizon ϕ, Lane topology Lfinal , ∆t for Inter-frame time interval, FOV (T): The set of all spatial coordinates within the perception range of the ego vehicle at pose T, Agents asset pool X , dlc for distance threshold of lane change. SpawnAgents: method generate initial state of agents, details in Alg. 4. 

Ensure: Rendered sequence of dynamic local environments {M (t)

> local

}ϕt=1 . 

> 1:

// Phase 1: Global Initialization & Pre-computation  

> 2:

Randomly select a global map Mglobal ∼ Uniform (M). 

> 3:

Get ego-poses {Tt}Tt=1 used to build Mglobal in Alg. 1.  

> 4:

Randomly select initial ego pose Tego  

> 0

∼ Uniform ({Tt}Tt=1 ). 

> 5:

Find Tfwd and Tbwd at distance ±dpre along {Tt}Tt=1 from Tego  

> 0

. 

> 6:

A ← SpawnAgents (Tego  

> 0

, True ) ∪ SpawnAgents (Tfwd ) ∪ SpawnAgents (Tbwd ) 

> 7:

// Phase 2: Closed-Loop Simulation  

> 8:

∆dego ← 0, Sout ← ∅ ▷ Init movement tracker and empty sequence for frames  

> 9:

for t = 1 . . . ϕ do  

> 10:

// Step 2.1: Rolling Horizon Update  

> 11:

∆dego ← ∆dego + v(t)

> ego

∆t 

> 12:

if ∆dego ≥ droll then  

> 13:

A ← { a ∈ A | pa ∈ FOV (Tego  

> t

)} ▷ Remove out-of-view agents  

> 14:

Tfwd ← Pose ahead of Tego  

> t

by dpre , Tbwd ← Pose behind of Tego  

> t

by dpre  

> 15:

A ← A ∪ SpawnAgents (Tfwd ) ∪ SpawnAgents (Tbwd ) 

> 16:

∆dego ← 0 

> 17:

// Step 2.2: IDM Kinematics & Route Execution  

> 18:

for each agent a ∈ A parameterized by state (pa, ha, v a, π traj , ptarget ) do  

> 19:

Let ha denote the heading unit vector of agent a. 

> 20:

Ca ←

n

a′ ∈ A \ { a} (pa′ −pa)·ha  

> ∥pa′−pa∥2

> 0.5 ∧ Dist (pa′ , π traj ) < d lat 

o 

> 21:

alead ← arg min a′∈C a ∥pa′ − pa∥2 ▷ Select out the agent ahead of current a  

> 22:

s ← ∥ palead − pa∥2, ∆v ← va − vlead ▷ adjusted if head-on  

> 23:

if s < d lc and (∆ v > 0 or ha · halead < −0.5) then  

> 24:

padj ← SearchParallelLane (pa, Lfinal ) 

> 25:

if padj ̸ = ∅ then  

> 26:

πbezier ← BezierCurve (pa, padj ) ▷ Generate smooth transition  

> 27:

πnew ← A-Star (Lfinal , padj , ptarget ) ▷ Re-route from adjacent lane  

> 28:

πtraj ← πbezier ⊕ πnew ▷ Concatenate trajectories  

> 29:

aacc ← IDM (va, v des , ∆v, s ) ▷ Compute acceleration  

> 30:

pa ← Advance (pa, π traj , v a∆t) ▷ Move along trajectory  

> 31:

// Step 2.3: Rendering  

> 32:

Avis ← { a ∈ A | pa ∈ FOV (Tego  

> t

)} ▷ Filter visible agents in current view  

> 33:

O(t) 

> T

← Crop (Mglobal , Tego  

> t

) ▷ Extract static local background  

> 34:

X (t) ← S 

> a∈A vis

Φrigid (§a, pa, ha) ▷ Transform and aggregate dynamic assets  

> 35:

M(t) 

> local

← O (t) 

> T

⊛ X (t) ▷ Overlay foreground onto static background  

> 36:

Sout ← S out ∪ {M (t)

> local

} ▷ Append rendered frame to sequence  

> 37:

return Sout 

22 References 

[1] Niket Agarwal, Arslan Ali, Maciej Bala, Yogesh Balaji, Erik Barker, Tiffany Cai, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Yongxin Chen, Yin Cui, Yifan Ding, et al. Cosmos world foundation model platform for physical ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03575 ,2025. [2] Hengwei Bian, Lingdong Kong, Haozhe Xie, Liang Pan, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Dynamiccity: Large-scale 4d occupancy generation from dynamic scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18084 , 2024. [3] Holger Caesar, Juraj Kabzan, Kok Seang Tan, Whye Kit Fong, Eric Wolff, Alex Lang, Luke Fletcher, Oscar Beijbom, and Sammy Omari. nuplan: A closed-loop ml-based planning benchmark for autonomous vehicles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11810 , 2021. [4] Qifeng Chen, Sheng Yang, Sicong Du, Tao Tang, Rengan Xie, Peng Chen, and Yuchi Huo. Lidar-gs: Real-time lidar re-simulation using gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05111 , 2024. [5] Kashyap Chitta, Daniel Dauner, and Andreas Geiger. Sledge: Synthesizing driving environments with generative models and rule-based traffic. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 57–74. Springer, 2024. [6] Felipe Codevilla, Antonio M Lopez, Vladlen Koltun, and Alexey Dosovitskiy. On offline evaluation of vision-based driving models. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 236–251, 2018. [7] Daniel Dauner, Marcel Hallgarten, Tianyu Li, Xinshuo Weng, Zhiyu Huang, Zetong Yang, Hongyang Li, Igor Gilitschen-ski, Boris Ivanovic, Marco Pavone, et al. Navsim: Data-driven non-reactive autonomous vehicle simulation and benchmarking. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:28706–28719, 2024. [8] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An open urban driving simulator. In A. D. Dragan, M. Hebert, and S. Levine, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning , volume 78 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1–16, Mountain View, CA, USA, 13–15 Nov 2017. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v78/dosovitskiy17a.html .[9] Dan Friedman and Adji Bousso Dieng. The vendi score: A diversity evaluation metric for machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02410 , 2022. [10] Shenyuan Gao, Jiazhi Yang, Li Chen, Kashyap Chitta, Yihang Qiu, Andreas Geiger, Jun Zhang, and Hongyang Li. Vista: A generalizable driving world model with high fidelity and versatile controllability. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:91560–91596, 2024. [11] Songen Gu, Wei Yin, Bu Jin, Xiaoyang Guo, Junming Wang, Haodong Li, Qian Zhang, and Xiaoxiao Long. Dome: Taming diffusion model into high-fidelity controllable occupancy world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10429 ,2024. [12] Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 16000–16009, 2022. [13] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598 , 2022. [14] Anthony Hu, Lloyd Russell, Hudson Yeo, Zak Murez, George Fedoseev, Alex Kendall, Jamie Shotton, and Gianluca Corrado. Gaia-1: A generative world model for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17080 , 2023. [15] Xiaotao Hu, Wei Yin, Mingkai Jia, Junyuan Deng, Xiaoyang Guo, Qian Zhang, Xiaoxiao Long, and Ping Tan. Drivingworld: Constructing world model for autonomous driving via video gpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19505 ,2024. [16] Arne Kesting, Martin Treiber, and Dirk Helbing. Enhanced intelligent driver model to access the impact of driving strategies on traffic capacity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , 368(1928):4585–4605, 2010. [17] Jumin Lee, Sebin Lee, Changho Jo, Woobin Im, Juhyeong Seon, and Sung-Eui Yoon. SemCity: Semantic scene generation with triplane diffusion. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 28337–28347, 2024. [18] Bohan Li, Jiazhe Guo, Hongsi Liu, Yingshuang Zou, Yikang Ding, Xiwu Chen, Hu Zhu, Feiyang Tan, Chi Zhang, Tiancai Wang, et al. Uniscene: Unified occupancy-centric driving scene generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 11971–11981, 2025. 

23 [19] Zhimin Liao, Ping Wei, Ruijie Zhang, Shuaijia Chen, Haoxuan Wang, and Ziyang Ren. I2-world: Intra-inter tokenization for efficient dynamic 4d scene forecasting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 25810–25819, 2025. [20] Tianran Liu, Shengwen Zhao, and Nicholas Rhinehart. Towards foundational lidar world models with efficient latent flow matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23434 , 2025. [21] Yifan Lu, Xuanchi Ren, Jiawei Yang, Tianchang Shen, Zhangjie Wu, Jun Gao, Yue Wang, Siheng Chen, Mike Chen, Sanja Fidler, et al. Infinicube: Unbounded and controllable dynamic 3d driving scene generation with world-guided video models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 27272–27283, 2025. [22] Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 11461–11471, 2022. [23] Xin Ma, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Gengyun Jia, Ziwei Liu, Yuan-Fang Li, Cunjian Chen, and Yu Qiao. Latte: Latent diffusion transformer for video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.03048 , 2024. [24] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 4195–4205, 2023. [25] Xuanchi Ren, Yifan Lu, Tianshi Cao, Ruiyuan Gao, Shengyu Huang, Amirmojtaba Sabour, Tianchang Shen, Tobias Pfaff, Jay Zhangjie Wu, Runjian Chen, et al. Cosmos-drive-dreams: Scalable synthetic driving data generation with world foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09042 , 2025. [26] Luke Rowe, Roger Girgis, Anthony Gosselin, Liam Paull, Christopher Pal, and Felix Heide. Scenario dreamer: Vectorized latent diffusion for generating driving simulation environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17207–17218, 2025. [27] Lloyd Russell, Anthony Hu, Lorenzo Bertoni, George Fedoseev, Jamie Shotton, Elahe Arani, and Gianluca Corrado. Gaia-2: A controllable multi-view generative world model for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20523 ,2025. [28] Yining Shi, Kun Jiang, Qiang Meng, Ke Wang, Jiabao Wang, Wenchao Sun, Tuopu Wen, Mengmeng Yang, and Diange Yang. Come: Adding scene-centric forecasting control to occupancy world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13260 ,2025. [29] Haoming Song, Delin Qu, Yuanqi Yao, Qizhi Chen, Qi Lv, Yiwen Tang, Modi Shi, Guanghui Ren, Maoqing Yao, Bin Zhao, et al. Hume: Introducing system-2 thinking in visual-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21432 ,2025. [30] Xiaoyu Tian, Tao Jiang, Longfei Yun, Yucheng Mao, Huitong Yang, Yue Wang, Yilun Wang, and Hang Zhao. Occ3d: A large-scale 3d occupancy prediction benchmark for autonomous driving. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:64318–64330, 2023. [31] Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [32] Eugene Vinitsky, Nathan Lichtlé, Xiaomeng Yang, Brandon Amos, and Jakob Foerster. Nocturne: a scalable driving benchmark for bringing multi-agent learning one step closer to the real world. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:3962–3974, 2022. [33] Yuping Wang, Xiangyu Huang, Xiaokang Sun, Mingxuan Yan, Shuo Xing, Zhengzhong Tu, and Jiachen Li. Uniocc: A unified benchmark for occupancy forecasting and prediction in autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 25560–25570, 2025. [34] Julong Wei, Shanshuai Yuan, Pengfei Li, Qingda Hu, Zhongxue Gan, and Wenchao Ding. Occllama: An occupancy-language-action generative world model for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03272 , 2024. [35] Haihong Xiao, Jianan Zou, Yuxin Zhou, Ying He, and Wenxiong Kang. Splatco: Structure-view collaborative gaussian splatting for detail-preserving rendering of large-scale unbounded scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17951 , 2025. [36] Tianyi Yan, Dongming Wu, Wencheng Han, Junpeng Jiang, Xia Zhou, Kun Zhan, Cheng-zhong Xu, and Jianbing Shen. Drivingsphere: Building a high-fidelity 4d world for closed-loop simulation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 27531–27541, 2025. 

24 [37] Jiazhi Yang, Kashyap Chitta, Shenyuan Gao, Long Chen, Yuqian Shao, Xiaosong Jia, Hongyang Li, Andreas Geiger, Xiangyu Yue, and Li Chen. Resim: Reliable world simulation for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09981 ,2025. [38] Xuemeng Yang, Licheng Wen, Tiantian Wei, Yukai Ma, Jianbiao Mei, Xin Li, Wenjie Lei, Daocheng Fu, Pinlong Cai, Min Dou, et al. Drivearena: A closed-loop generative simulation platform for autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 26933–26943, 2025. [39] Yu Yang, Alan Liang, Jianbiao Mei, Yukai Ma, Yong Liu, and Gim Hee Lee. X-scene: Large-scale driving scene generation with high fidelity and flexible controllability. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [40] Ze Yang, Yun Chen, Jingkang Wang, Sivabalan Manivasagam, Wei-Chiu Ma, Anqi Joyce Yang, and Raquel Urtasun. Unisim: A neural closed-loop sensor simulator. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1389–1399, 2023. [41] Kaiwen Zhang, Zhenyu Tang, Xiaotao Hu, Xingang Pan, Xiaoyang Guo, Yuan Liu, Jingwei Huang, Li Yuan, Qian Zhang, Xiao-Xiao Long, et al. Epona: Autoregressive diffusion world model for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.24113 , 2025. [42] Lingfeng Zhang, Yuecheng Liu, Zhanguang Zhang, Matin Aghaei, Yaochen Hu, Hongjian Gu, Mohammad Ali Alomrani, David Gamaliel Arcos Bravo, Raika Karimi, Atia Hamidizadeh, et al. Mem2ego: Empowering vision-language models with global-to-ego memory for long-horizon embodied navigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14254 , 2025. [43] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 3836–3847, 2023. [44] Wenzhao Zheng, Weiliang Chen, Yuanhui Huang, Borui Zhang, Yueqi Duan, and Jiwen Lu. Occworld: Learning a 3d occupancy world model for autonomous driving. In European conference on computer vision , pages 55–72. Springer, 2024. [45] Hongyu Zhou, Longzhong Lin, Jiabao Wang, Yichong Lu, Dongfeng Bai, Bingbing Liu, Yue Wang, Andreas Geiger, and Yiyi Liao. Hugsim: A real-time, photo-realistic and closed-loop simulator for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01718 , 2024. 

25